000
/H170152008 by JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH, Inc. ● Vol. 35 ● August 2008
All rights reserved. 0093-5301/2008/3502-0002$10.00. DOI: 10.1086/586910
A Room with a Viewpoint: Using Social
Norms to Motivate Environmental
Conservation in Hotels
NOAH J. GOLDSTEIN
ROBERT B. CIALDINI
VLADAS GRISKEVICIUS*
Two ﬁeld experiments examined the effectiveness of signs requesting hotel guests’
participation in an environmental conservation program. Appeals employing de-
scriptive norms (e.g., “the majority of guests reuse their towels”) proved superior
to a traditional appeal widely used by hotels that focused solely on environmental
protection. Moreover, normative appeals were most effective when describing
group behavior that occurred in the setting that most closely matched individuals’
immediate situational circumstances (e.g., “the majority of guests in this room reuse
their towels”), which we refer to as provincial norms. Theoretical and practical
implications for managing proenvironmental efforts are discussed.
U
ntil recently, the greatest towel-related dilemma trav-
elers faced was reﬂected in the old joke told by the
nightclub comic, Henny Youngman, about the hotel where
he had stayed the previous night: “What a hotel: the towels
were so big and ﬂuffy that I could hardly close my suitcase.”
In recent years, however, the question of whether or not to
remove hotel towels has been supplanted by the question
of whether or not to reuse hotel towels during the course
of one’s stay. With the adoption of environmental programs
by hotels, more and more travelers are ﬁnding themselves
urged to reuse their towels to help conserve environmental
resources by saving energy and reducing the amount of
detergent-related pollutants released into the environment.
*Noah J. Goldstein is assistant professor of behavioral sciences at the
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business (noah.goldstein@
ChicagoGSB.edu). Robert B. Cialdini is Regents’ Professor of Marketing
and Psychology at Arizona State University (Robert.Cialdini@asu.edu).
Vladas Griskevicius is assistant professor of marketing, Carlson School
of Management, University of Minnesota (grisk001@umn.edu). Funding
for these studies was provided by a grant from the Hewlett Foundation
(2001-7396). Correspondence should be addressed to Noah Goldstein. The
authors gratefully acknowledge very helpful suggestions on earlier versions
of the article from Jenessa Shapiro, Wes Schultz, the editor, the associate
editor, and the reviewers. And ﬁnally, our appreciation goes to Tom Kreitler
and his management staff, and to all of the hotel room attendants who
helped us collect the data; their cooperation and generosity were pivotal
to the completion of this research.
John Deighton served as editor and Mary Frances Luce served as associate
editor for this article.
Electronically published March 3, 2008
In most cases, the appeal comes in the form of a strategically
placed card in the hotels’ washrooms. In addition to the
inherent beneﬁt to the environment and to society, such
programs are used by an increasing number of hotel chains
because of the considerable economic beneﬁts of enacting
them. Besides the direct savings on costs such as labor,
water, energy, and detergent, there is a burgeoning segment
of consumers who reward businesses that address environ-
mental concerns through their business practices (Carlson,
Grove, and Kangun 1993; Menon and Menon 1997).
With a nearly limitless array of angles to play and mo-
tivational strings to pull, how have marketing practitioners
chosen to encourage hotel guests to participate in these en-
vironmentally and economically beneﬁcial programs? Con-
sidering the ﬁnding that over three-quarters of Americans
think of themselves as environmentalists (Mackoy, Calan-
tone, and Droge 1995), it is not surprising that tacticians
overwhelmingly have tended to focus on the importance of
such programs for the protection of the environment. Guests
are almost invariably informed that reusing one’s towels
will conserve natural resources and help save the environ-
ment from further depletion, disruption, and corruption. No-
table in its complete absence from these surveyed persuasive
appeals was one based on a potentially powerful motivator
of prosocial behavior: social norms.
When consumers learn that seven out of 10 people choose
one brand of automobile over another, that teeth-whitening
toothpaste has become more popular than its less functional
counterpart, and that nearly everyone at the local cafeteria
steers clear of the “spamburger surprise” entre ´e, they are
000 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
getting information about social norms. Speciﬁcally, they
are getting information about descriptive norms, which refer
to how most people behave in a situation. Descriptive norms
motivate both private and public actions by informing in-
dividuals of what is likely to be effective or adaptive be-
havior in that situation (Cialdini, Kallgren, and Reno 1991).
A wide variety of research shows that the behavior of others
in the social environment shapes individuals’ interpretations
of, and responses to, the situation (Bearden and Etzel 1982),
especially in novel, ambiguous, or uncertain situations (Gris-
kevicius et al. 2006; Hochbaum 1954; Park and Lessig 1977;
Shapiro and Neuberg, forthcoming).
RESEARCH OVERVIEW
The complete absence of a descriptive normative ap-
proach to hotel conservation programs is especially re-
markable considering that studies conducted by the largest
manufacturer of hotel towel reuse signs indicate that ap-
proximately 75% of guests who have the opportunity to
participate in such programs do reuse their towels at least
once during their stay. From a practical perspective, then,
one purpose of this research was to investigate whether using
an appeal that conveys the descriptive norm for participation
in such programs would be more effective at encouraging
towel reuse than the current industry standard appeal. We
tested this hypothesis in experiment 1 by creating our own
towel reuse cards and recording the extent to which each
of the two appeals spurred guests to participate in a hotel’s
conservation program.
The central theoretical purpose of the present investiga-
tion was to examine how hotel guests’ conformity to a de-
scriptive norm varies as a function of the type of reference
group tied to that norm. In experiment 2, we examine
whether the norm of hotel guests’ immediate surroundings,
which we refer to as the provincial norm, motivates con-
formity to the norm to a greater extent than the norm of
guests’ less immediate surroundings, which we refer to as
the global norm. Speciﬁcally, we investigate whether guests
who learn the descriptive norm for their particular room are
more likely to participate in the program than guests who
learn the same descriptive norm for the whole hotel, even
though the provincial norm in this context is rationally no
better an indicator of correct or proper behavior than the
global norm. We also explore the counterintuitive notion
that individuals might be more likely to follow the norms
of a personally unimportant reference group than those of
a more important one when the personally unimportant ref-
erence group is provincial in nature.
More broadly, we felt it was important to venture outside
the laboratory and into the ﬁeld to study how social norms
operate on actual consumption—or conservation—choices.
Although much research has been conducted on normative
inﬂuences, the vast majority of the literature on social norms
comes from highly controlled experiments in which the var-
iables of interest are made especially salient to participants.
This stands in stark contrast to how norms operate in the
real world—that is, in a mix of inﬂuences that may over-
power, dilute, or distract from the factors under examination.
Thus, it is possible that the impact of social norms has been
exaggerated in experimental settings, which typically man-
age and prioritize norm salience (Cialdini and Goldstein
2004). It is conceivable, then, that marketing practitioners
and consumers alike might be justiﬁably skeptical about
whether social norms will prove to be potent or salient
enough in the course of naturally occurring conduct to in-
ﬂuence real-world, socially important behavioral choices.
Therefore, empirical examinations of social normative inﬂu-
ence in real-world contexts would be especially informative.
Finally, these experiments are aimed at better understand-
ing the factors that motivate consumers to engage in actions
for the beneﬁt of the environment. This important topic,
along with prosocial behavior, in general, is a severely un-
derstudied area of consumer research (Menon and Menon
1997; Mick 2006; Robin and Reidenbach 1987; see also
Bendapudi, Singh, and Bendapudi 1996). The consumer re-
search literature has also tended to focus on the factors that
incline individuals toward consumption rather than toward
conservation, an imbalance that the current research aims
to help rectify.
EXPERIMENT 1: SOCIAL NORMS VERSUS
INDUSTRY STANDARD
For experiment 1, we created two signs soliciting partic-
ipation in the towel reuse program of a hotel that was part
of a well-known national hotel chain. One message, which
was designed to reﬂect the industry standard approach, fo-
cused on the importance of environment protection but pro-
vided no explicit descriptive norm. A second message con-
veyed the descriptive norm, informing guests that the
majority of other guests do, in fact, participate in the pro-
gram at least once during their stays. Based on the foregoing
analysis, we hypothesized that the message conveying the
descriptive norm would result in greater towel reuse than
the industry standard message.
Method
Participants. Over an 80-day span, we collected data
on 1,058 instances of potential towel reuse in 190 rooms in
a midsized, midpriced hotel in the Southwest that was part
of a national hotel chain. The guests were not aware that
they were participants in the study.
Materials. Two different messages urging guests’ par-
ticipation in the towel reuse program were printed on signs
positioned on washroom towel racks:
• The standard environmental message focused guests’
attention on the importance of environmental protection
but did not provide any descriptive normative infor-
mation: “HELP SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT. You can
show your respect for nature and help save the envi-
ronment by reusing your towels during your stay.”
• The descriptive norm message informed guests that a
majority of other guests participate in the towel reuse
SOCIAL NORMS AND CONSERVATION BEHAVIOR 000
FIGURE 1
EXAMPLE OF TOWEL REUSE SIGN (EXPERIMENT 1)
program: “JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN HELP-
ING TO SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT . Almost 75%
of guests who are asked to participate in our new re-
source savings program do help by using their towels
more than once. You can join your fellow guests in this
program to help save the environment by reusing your
towels during your stay.”
Below each of the respective messages were instructions
informing the guests how to indicate their willingness to
participate in the program. The instructions stated, “If you
choose to participate in the program, please drape used tow-
els over the curtain rod or the towel rack. If you choose not
to participate in the program, please place the towels on the
ﬂoor.” Below the instructions, additional text informed the
guests, “See the back of this card for more information on
the impact of participating in this program.”
On the back of each towel reuse sign, information about
the beneﬁts of participating in the program was provided
with the following text: “ DID YOU KNOW that if most of
this hotel’s guests participate in our resource savings pro-
gram, it would save the environment 72,000 gallons of water
and 39 barrels of oil, and would prevent nearly 480 gallons
of detergent from being released into the environment this
year alone?”
The signs were printed on a high-resolution color laser
printer and were professionally coated with 7-millimeter-thick
laminate on each side. They were then sent to a professional
die-cut company, where they were cut into the towel rack
hanger shape (see ﬁg. 1).
Training. The hotel’s room attendants were responsible
for collecting the participation data; the form they had al-
ready been using was modiﬁed for data reporting. Because
the hotel already had a conservation program in place before
this study began, and the participation criteria for the hotel’s
existing program and the criteria used in our research dif-
fered slightly, we were careful to ensure that the room at-
tendants completely understood and adopted the new criteria
in terms of both towel replacement and data collection. For
experiments 1 and 2, instructions were given to the room
attendants a number of times in multiple languages, and
they were shown pictures detailing what was and was not
considered to be participation in the program. A great deal
of time was spent ensuring that the room attendants under-
stood the protocol. Several room attendants who did not
understand our directions during training due to the language
barrier or who did not follow our instructions throughout
the study were excluded from the analyses.
Intervention. Each of the 190 hotel rooms was ran-
domly assigned to one of the two different messages. One
week prior to data collection, the hotel room attendant su-
pervisor placed one sign on the towel rack in each hotel
room’s washroom. The room attendants recorded the par-
ticipation data on the appropriate forms.
Results and Discussion
Because the towel reuse program was not applicable to
those staying only one night, the data were recorded only
for guests who stayed a minimum of two nights. In addition,
throughout these studies, we analyzed only the towel reuse
data from guests’ ﬁrst eligible day of participation so that
no guest would participate in the study more than once. The
dependent variable was dichotomous; room attendants sim-
ply recorded whether guests reused at least one towel.
Consistent with our hypothesis, a chi-square test revealed
that the descriptive norm condition yielded a signiﬁcantly
higher towel reuse rate (44.1%) than the environmental pro-
tection condition (35.1%; , ,
2x (1, N p 433) p 3.72 p p .05
; see ﬁg. 2). The results of experiment 1 showed thatF p .09
the normative sign, which we have never observed employed
by any hotel, yielded a towel reuse rate that was signiﬁcantly
higher than the industry standard. We should note, however,
that at ﬁrst glance there appears to be an important short-
coming to the descriptive normative approach. Speciﬁcally,
000 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
FIGURE 2
TOWEL REUSE RATES AS A FUNCTION OF SIGN IN ROOM
(EXPERIMENT 1)
we informed participants that a large majority (75%) of the
hotel’s guests participated in the towel reuse program—a
number provided by the company that supplies such cards
to hoteliers—yet the best-performing message yielded only
a 44.1% towel reuse rate. There are two reasons for this
discrepancy that render this a less worrisome problem. First,
in keeping with the data reported by the towel hanger sup-
pliers, the signs in our study informed the guests that the
majority of individuals recycled at least one towel sometime
during their stay. Because we only examined towel reuse
data for participants’ ﬁrst eligible day, the compliance rate
we observed is likely an underestimation of the number of
individuals who recycle their towels at least once during
their stay. Second, we used the most conservative standards
for counting compliance; that is, we did not count as a reuse
effort a towel that was hung on a door hook or doorknob—a
very common practice for towel recyclers who misunder-
stand or do not thoroughly read the instructions—as we
wanted to eliminate the likelihood of guests complying un-
intentionally with the request. Thus, the overall percentage
of towel reuse was artiﬁcially suppressed.
EXPERIMENT 2: WHOSE NORMS
DO WE FOLLOW?
Experiment 1 demonstrated how hotel guests were es-
pecially motivated to reuse their towels when they learned
that most others have chosen to participate in the environ-
mental conservation program. In experiment 2, we sought
to investigate how hotel guests’ conformity to such a de-
scriptive norm varies as a function of the type of reference
group attached to that norm.
Several factors are known to inﬂuence the extent to which
individuals will adhere to the descriptive norms of a given
reference group (Cialdini and Goldstein 2004; Goldstein and
Cialdini, forthcoming). One important variable affecting the
likelihood of norm adherence is the level of perceived sim-
ilarity among others and a given individual (Burnkrant and
Cousineau 1975; Moschis 1976). According to Festinger’s
(1954) social comparison theory, people often evaluate
themselves by comparing themselves to others—especially
to others with whom they share similar personal character-
istics. In line with this supposition, people are indeed more
likely to follow the behaviors of others with similar features,
including age (Murray et al. 1984), personality attributes
(Carli, Ganley, and Pierce-Otay 1991), gender (White, Hogg,
and Terry 2002), and attitudes (Suedfeld, Bochner, and Matas
1971).
Another well-established factor affecting norm adherence
is the extent to which individuals identify with the reference
group. Much of the research exploring this relationship has
examined the topic from a social identity perspective. Al-
though the concept of social identity has taken on a variety
of meanings in various disciplines, it is often deﬁned broadly
as an expansion of the self-concept involving a shift in the
level of self-conception from the individual self to the col-
lective self, frequently based on perceived membership in
a social category (Hogg 2003; Reed 2004). An individual
may hold social identities at various levels of abstraction,
ranging from concrete groups of people (e.g., our depart-
ment’s faculty) to broader categories of people (e.g., men,
women, citizen). A number of scholars have argued that
one’s adherence to the descriptive norms of a group of peo-
ple is primarily inﬂuenced by the perceived importance of
those others to one’s self-concept and social identity (Bear-
den, Nettemeyer, and Teel 1989; Brinberg and Plimpton
1986; Kelman 1961; Terry, Hogg, and White 1999). Ac-
cording to this perspective, when the relevant social identity
is salient (Forehand and Deshpande´ 2001; Forehand, Desh-
pande´, and Reed 2002), individuals will adhere to the norms
of that social identity to the extent that they consider the
social identity to be personally important to them (Desh-
pande´, Hoyer, and Donthu 1986; Kleine, Kleine, and Kernan
1993; Reed 2004; Stayman and Deshpande´ 1989; Terry and
Hogg 1996; Terry et al. 1999).
A close inspection of the normative social identity lit-
erature and of the body of research examining the role of
similarity on norm adherence reveals that both research areas
have focused almost exclusively on the importance of com-
monalities among personal, rather than contextual, charac-
teristics of individuals and the groups whose behaviors they
observe. That is, these literatures examine how personal
similarities (e.g., in attitudes, gender, ethnicity, age, values)
between a target individual and a group of people inﬂuence
the target’s adherence to the group’s social norms. However,
researchers have largely failed to address the role of situ-
ational similarities in norm adherence.
SOCIAL NORMS AND CONSERVATION BEHAVIOR 000
Adhering to provincial norms—the norms of one’s local
setting and circumstances—is typically both logical and
effective. For example, what may be effective and norm-
consistent behavior at one’s fraternity party is certainly not
going to be adaptive in other settings and situations, es-
pecially those with powerful and well-established norms,
such as how to behave in a library during ﬁnals week
(Aarts and Dijksterhuis 2003). After all, the old adage tells
us that we should do as the Romans do when we are in
Rome—not when we are in Egypt. In contrast, much of
the current social norms literature, which focuses on the
importance of personal similarities, would emphasize that
Romans should do what other Romans do—especially if
they highly identify with other Romans—while saying lit-
tle about the role of their surroundings. Thus, we argue
that individuals are more likely to be inﬂuenced by the
norms of their immediate surroundings than those of their
less immediate surroundings.
In experiment 2, we examined whether the towel reuse
norm of hotel guests’ immediate surroundings (i.e., the pro-
vincial norm for their particular room) motivates participation
in the conservation program to a greater extent than the norm
of guests’ less immediate surroundings (i.e., the global norm
for the whole hotel), despite the fact that, in this context, the
provincial norm is rationally no more diagnostic of effective
or appropriate behavior than the global norm. We also sought
to investigate whether individuals might be more likely to
follow the norms of a personally unimportant reference group
than those of a more important one when the personally un-
important reference group is provincial in nature.
We created ﬁve towel reuse signs soliciting the partici-
pation of guests at the same hotel that was used in exper-
iment 1. One was the standard environmental sign from
experiment 1, which focused on the importance of environ-
ment protection but provided no explicit descriptive norm.
All four of the other messages, which communicated the
descriptive norm, informed guests that in a study conducted
several years earlier, approximately 75% of the people who
had been asked to participate in these programs did so. We
chose the timing of this ostensible study to be several years
before experiment 2 actually took place so that guests would
not feel as though their behaviors were currently being recor-
ded.
We altered the reference group identity in those four nor-
mative messages—that is, to whom the norms referred. One
of the signs conveyed that these norms were characteristic
of other hotel guests (global norm), whereas another con-
veyed that these norms were characteristic of a rationally
meaningless and relatively nondiagnostic group—other ho-
tel guests who had stayed in the guests’ particular rooms
(provincial norm). The other two signs conveyed norms of
reference groups that are considered to be important and
personally meaningful to people’s social identities. Specif-
ically, a third sign paired the descriptive norm with the
reference group identity of citizen (see Madrigal 2001),
whereas a fourth sign paired it with a meaningful social
category commonly used in reference group and social iden-
tity research, that of gender (Bardach and Park 1996; Mac-
coby 1988; Meyers-Levy 1988; Stitka and Maslach 1996).
Based on the premise that it is generally beneﬁcial to
follow the norms that most closely match one’s environ-
ment, situation, or circumstances, we hypothesized that the
appeal conveying the descriptive norm of that particular
room’s previous occupants—the identity that should be the
least meaningful but most relevant to guests’ local circum-
stances—would result in higher towel reuse rates than the
other descriptive norm appeals.
Method
Participants. Over a 53-day span, we collected data on
1,595 instances of potential towel reuse at the same hotel
used in experiment 1. Once again, the guests were not aware
that they were participants in a study.
Materials. Five different messages urging guests’ par-
ticipation in the towel reuse program were printed on signs
positioned on washroom towel racks:
• The standard environmental message focused guests on
the importance of environmental protection but did not
provide any descriptive normative information: “HELP
SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT. You can show your re-
spect for nature and help save the environment by re-
using your towels during your stay.”
• The guest identity descriptive norm message stated
“JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS IN HELPING TO
SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT. In a study conducted in
Fall 2003, 75% of the guests participated in our new
resource savings program by using their towels more than
once. You can join your fellow guests in this program
to help save the environment by reusing your towels
during your stay.”
• The message for the same room identity descriptive
norm message stated “JOIN YOUR FELLOW GUESTS
IN HELPING TO SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT.I na
study conducted in Fall 2003, 75% of the guests who
stayed in this room (#xxx) participated in our new re-
source savings program by using their towels more than
once. You can join your fellow guests in this program
to help save the environment by reusing your towels
during your stay.” Note that “(#xxx)” would be replaced
with “(#313)” for room 313, for example.
• The citizen identity descriptive norm message stated
“JOIN YOUR FELLOW CITIZENS IN HELPING TO
SA VE THE ENVIRONMENT. In a study conducted in
Fall 2003, 75% of the guests participated in our new
resource savings program by using their towels more
than once. You can join your fellow citizens in this
program to help save the environment by reusing your
towels during your stay.”
• The message for the gender identity descriptive norm
condition stated “ JOIN THE MEN AND WOMEN
WHO ARE HELPING TO SA VE THE ENVIRON-
MENT. In a study conducted in Fall 2003, 76% of the
women and 74% of the men participated in our new
000 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
resource savings program by using their towels more
than once. You can join the other men and women in
this program to help save the environment by reusing
your towels during your stay.”
Test of Manipulations. Because we could not ask the
actual participants additional questions about our speciﬁc
manipulations, we asked a separate group of participants
questions regarding two key aspects of the social categories
that we used for the appeals in experiment 2. First, we
wanted to examine the extent to which each of our appeals
activated the intended social identities. Second, we wished
to investigate the degree to which participants felt that each
of these social identities was personally meaningful to them.
To achieve these goals, 53 participants were asked to con-
sider that they were staying at a hotel and saw one of ﬁve
signs (which we presented to them in random order) hanging
on the towel rack in the washroom. After reading the mes-
sage on each sign, participants were asked about the extent
to which reading that particular message made them think
of the corresponding social identity. Speciﬁcally, they were
asked, “To what extent would reading the sign make you
think of your identity as . . .” one of the following: “an
environmentally concerned individual, a hotel guest, a cit-
izen, a male or female, or a guest in the particular room in
which you are staying”? The response choices ranged from
“not at all” (1) to “a great deal” (5). When ﬁnished with
this exercise, participants were asked, one at a time and in
random order, “How important to your identity is being
. . .” followed by one of the ﬁve aforementioned social
identities. The response choices ranged from “not at all” (1)
to “very much” (7).
We expected participants to rate each of the signs as
equally effective at making them think about the relevant
social identity or identities that the messages highlighted,
which would suggest that our operationalizations of the con-
ditions were successful. Where we did expect to see a no-
ticeable difference, however, was in the participants’ ratings
of the importance of the various social categories to their
social identity. Speciﬁcally, we anticipated that participants
would consider their identities as a citizen, as a male or
female, and as an environmentally concerned individual to
be more important than as a hotel guest and, especially, as
a hotel guest in a particular room.
The results of this test of the manipulations supported our
expectations. A within-subjects analysis of variance revealed
that there were no signiﬁcant differences in the extent to
which each of the messages made participants think of their
social identity as it related to the relevant social category
( , NS; overall ; ). ThisF(5, 53) p 1.21 M p 3.02 SD p 0.14
ﬁnding supports the assertion that our operationalizations of
each of the conditions were equally effective at making
salient the intended social identities.
To examine the extent to which participants viewed the
various social categories as important to their own identities,
we conducted several within-subjects contrasts, the out-
comes of which supported our predictions. As expected, the
combined categories of citizen, male or female, and envi-
ronmentally concerned individual ( ; )M p 5.12 SD p 0.84
were considered much more important to participants’ iden-
tities than were the combined categories of hotel guest and
hotel guest in a particular room ( ; ;M p 2.19 SD p 0.32
, , ). Also as expected,
2F(1, 52) p 191.56 p ! .001 h p .79p
the category of hotel guest in a particular room was less
important to participants’ identities ( ; M p 1.96 SD p
) than was the broader category of hotel guest (1.39 M p
; ; , , ; see 22.42 SD p 1.62 F(1, 52) p 6.49 p p .01 h p .11p
ﬁg. 3).
Intervention. Each of the hotel rooms was randomly
assigned to one of the ﬁve different messages. One week
prior to data collection, the hotel room attendant supervisor
placed one sign on the towel rack in each hotel room’s
washroom. The room attendants recorded the participation
data on the appropriate forms.
Results
A chi-square test for overall differences among the towel
reuse rates for the ﬁve conditions yielded a signiﬁcant dif-
ference among the groups ( ,
2x (4, N p 1,595) p 9.87 p !
, ; see ﬁg. 4). In line with our predictions, a.05 F p .08
planned comparison revealed that all four descriptive norm
messages combined (44.5%) fared signiﬁcantly better than
the standard environmental message (37.2%;
2x (1, N p
, , ). That is, merely inform-1,595) p 4.94 p p .03 F p .06
ing hotel guests that other guests generally reused their tow-
els signiﬁcantly increased towel reuse compared to focusing
guests on the importance of environmental protection.
Consistent with predictions, an additional planned com-
parison revealed that the same room identity descriptive
norm condition yielded a signiﬁcantly higher towel reuse
rate (49.3%) than the other three descriptive norm con-
ditions combined (42.8%; ,
2x (1, N p 1,318) p 4.18 p !
, ). That is, even though the provincial norm for.05 F p .06
the frequency of guests’ towel reuse in a particular hotel
room is not any more diagnostic of effective or approved
behavior than the other norms—and the same-room message
references the norms of the least meaningful group in the
experiment—this condition produced the highest level of
towel reuse. These other three descriptive norm condi-
tions—the citizen identity descriptive norm (43.5%), the
gender identity descriptive norm (40.9%), and the guest
identity descriptive norm (44.0%)—did not differ from one
another, all .p’s
1 .42
Discussion
Several aspects of the ﬁndings from experiment 2 are
noteworthy. First, the social identity salience data suggested
that the social categories highlighted in each of the messages
focused the participants on the intended social identity and
that the messages did so equally. Second, the data conﬁrmed
our expectations regarding the large disparities in the extent
to which the various social categories were considered by
participants to be important to their own identities. Specif-
SOCIAL NORMS AND CONSERVATION BEHAVIOR 000
FIGURE 3
IMPORTANCE OF SOCIAL IDENTITIES (EXPERIMENT 2)
FIGURE 4
TOWEL REUSE RATES AS A FUNCTION OF SIGN IN ROOM (EXPERIMENT 2)
ically, the categories of both hotel guest and guest in a
particular room were signiﬁcantly less important to partic-
ipants’ identities than were those associated with gender,
citizenship, and environmentalism. Third, we found that the
towel reuse rates of the four descriptive normative message
identities did not map onto the extent to which individuals
consider those identities personally meaningful and impor-
tant to them. These data are particularly interesting in light
of the research suggesting that the more important a social
category is to an individual’s social identity, the more likely
he or she will be to follow the norms of that category. That
is, much of the extant literature suggests that participants’
conservation behaviors should map onto the importance rat-
ings. According to the importance ratings, participants
should have been most likely to follow the norms of citizens
or males/females and least likely to conform to the norms
of hotel guests for the particular room in which the partic-
ipants were staying. Yet, the data indicate that the appeal
conveying the descriptive norm of those who had previously
stayed in the guests’ room yielded not the lowest compliance
000 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
rate, as predicted by the importance ratings, but, in fact, the
highest compliance rate (see ﬁgs. 3 and 4).
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Noting how very little empirical work has been conducted
in the consumer behavior literature on the factors that in-
ﬂuence consumers’ prosocial behaviors, and even less on
proenvironmental behaviors, researchers have emphasized
the need for more consumer research in such areas (Ben-
dapudi et al. 1996; Menon and Menon 1997; Mick 2006;
Robin and Reidenbach 1987). The present research seeks to
redress this gap in the literature while also making theoretical
contributions so as to better understand the types of norms
and identities that are likely to motivate consumer behavior
in general.
The results of two ﬁeld experiments demonstrated the
power of descriptive norms to motivate others to engage in
the important real-world domain of environmental conser-
vation. Furthermore, the superiority of the descriptive norm
messages relative to the industry standard, which experiment
2 showed activated guests’ identities as environmentally
concerned individuals but provided no explicit descriptive
norm, suggests that making a meaningful social identity
salient without providing descriptive normative information
is not an optimal approach.
The current research also examined an often-ignored as-
pect of social norms. Although the social identity literature
and the literature on the effects of similarity have addressed
the issues of “who” as they related to adherence to social
norms, these literatures have by and large failed to address
the issues of “where.” That is, these bodies of research have
focused on how personal, rather than situational, common-
alities among inﬂuence targets and reference groups affect
social norm adherence.
Experiment 2 conﬁrmed that individuals are, in fact, more
likely to be inﬂuenced by descriptive norms when the setting
in which those norms are formed is comparable to the setting
those individuals are currently occupying, an issue that no
prior research of which we are aware has addressed. Those
informed that the majority of people who had stayed within
the conﬁnes of their immediate surroundings—their
room—had participated in the towel reuse program were
most likely to participate in the program themselves. This
was the case even though the normative information was
rationally no more informative or diagnostic of effective
or appropriate behavior than information about the norms
of less physically proximate surroundings. For example,
there was no logical reason that the norms of people who
had stayed in a guest’s particular room should be any more
informative for the guest’s own conduct than the norms
of those who stayed in a room across the hall. In fact, one
might even argue that it is more rational to follow the
global norms, which should be more diagnostic of effective
action because they describe the actions of a greater num-
ber of people.
Another important ﬁnding of this research is that the greater
motivational power of provincial group norms over global
group norms does not appear to be driven by the extent to
which people consider the group identities referenced by the
norms to be personally important to them. In experiment 2,
participants were more likely to follow the descriptive norms
of a group of individuals with whom they shared the same
setting than the norms of groups sharing the social identities
that we tested. In fact, consistent with predictions, but con-
trary to previous conceptualizations, we found that partic-
ipation rates were actually highest for the reference group
that participants felt was the least personally meaningful to
them (but most physically proximate).
How can the data we obtained in these experiments be
reconciled with previous research demonstrating that group
norms are followed to the extent that the group is considered
meaningful to an individual? We are certainly not arguing
that the meaningfulness of a group or social identity to one’s
personal identity is irrelevant; in fact, in many cases, it might
be one of the strongest individual predictors of adherence
to such norms. Instead, we are suggesting that the mean-
ingfulness of the group to one’s social identity is but one
of several central determinants of consumers’ private ad-
herence to social norms. In addition to the factors of norm
salience (Cialdini et al. 1991), the level of uncertainty (Fes-
tinger 1954), and the extent of meaningfulness/identiﬁcation
with the reference group (Deshpande´ et al. 1986), another
important factor is the degree of match among one’s setting,
situation, and circumstances and those in which the norms
were formed.
Potential Mechanisms Underlying the Effect of
Provincial Norms
There are several potential processes that might be re-
sponsible for the enhanced towel reuse among those in the
provincial norm condition. However, with the limitations of
ﬁeld experiment data, we can only speculate at this point.
One possible explanation for why provincial norms might
be especially inﬂuential stems from the fact that it is typi-
cally beneﬁcial to follow the norms that most closely match
one’s immediate settings, situations, and circumstances. As
a natural part of the learning process, individuals are attuned
to the extent to which their inferences, decisions, and be-
haviors have led to adaptive outcomes in the past. To make
information processing and decision making more manage-
able in novel or uncertain circumstances, individuals often
generalize the associations they learn from previous expe-
riences (Zebrowitz 1990).Although such generalizations often
lead to correct interpretations of stimuli, successful decisions,
and effective behaviors, they occasionally lead to errors due to
the unavailability of information or to the overgeneralization
of their previous association (Zebrowitz and Collins 1997). For
example, a consumer who has been satisﬁed with the reliability
of her previous automobile purchases from several different
Japanese manufacturers may overgeneralize this association,
leading her to believe, even mistakenly, that all Japanese-made
cars are reliable. Such an overgeneralization could affect her
future purchases—and possibly lead to a mistake when pur-
SOCIAL NORMS AND CONSERVATION BEHAVIOR 000
chasing a Japanese brand with which she has no previous exper-
ience.
Similarly, because individuals learn through experience
that the norms characteristic of their proximate settings tend
to be more diagnostic of effective and appropriate behavior
than those characteristic of more general or distal settings,
they may overgeneralize this association, which could lead
them to behave in ways that are not entirely rational. Spe-
ciﬁcally, this overgeneralized association might inﬂuence be-
havior even when the norms of one’s local environment are
clearly and rationally no more indicative of successful or
proper behavior than those of more general or distal environ-
ments.
Another possible explanation for the greater motivational
strength of provincial norms is suggested by Heider’s (1958)
work on interpersonal relations. Heider argued that, although
socially meaningful similarities can engender strong feelings
of association (which he referred to as the perception of a
unit relationship) between a person and another entity, even
minor and socially irrelevant similarities can create unit re-
lationships of comparable or greater magnitudes. According
to Heider, people perceive unit relationships with another
individual when it becomes salient that they share with that
other an uncommon experience or attribute not shared by
others around them (see also Tajfel 1978). Moreover, in
order to keep in a state of balance, individuals are often
driven to change their attitudes or behavior in accordance
with the standards of the individual or group with whom
they share a unit relationship (Insko 1981).
Thus, if strong unit connections can be created without
the existence of meaningful group identities, and individuals
tend to follow the norms of others with whom they feel
associated—even if the association is not based on a mean-
ingful group identity—individuals in some circumstances
might be more likely to follow the norms of a meaningless
and unimportant social identity than a meaningful and im-
portant social identity. As Heider suggested, this is partic-
ularly likely to be the case when the connection is based
on an uncommon characteristic (see also Goldstein and Cial-
dini 2007). Therefore, the rarity of the shared social identity
may be another central determinant of consumers’ private
adherence to a reference group’s social norms. In light of
this supposition, consider that in experiment 2, although
individuals report that the social identities of citizen and
male or female are important to them, these identities are
likely to be considered common. However, the social iden-
tity of a hotel guest in a particular room is considered un-
important to individuals but is also likely considered to be
more uncommon. Guests in any given room have shared the
same experience of staying in that room with relatively few
people and thus may feel a close association with those
individuals. This suggests that had we employed a descrip-
tive norm characterizing a social identity that was considered
by guests to be both important and uncommon, the unit
relationship between the guests and the group might have
been especially powerful, leading to a greater sense of af-
ﬁliation with the reference group and to even higher towel
reuse rates. Future research that empirically tests these and
other potential mechanisms will be fruitful in better under-
standing the processes underlying the driving force of pro-
vincial norms.
Implications for Marketers, Managers,
and Policy Makers
The results of our studies have clear implications for mar-
keters, managers, and policy makers. It is worth noting that
the normative messages, which were messages that we have
never seen used by hotel chains, fared signiﬁcantly better
at spurring participation in the hotel’s environmental con-
servation program than did the type of message most com-
monly used by hotel chains—messages that focus on the
importance of environmental protection and that make sa-
lient guests’ identities as environmentalists. These ﬁndings
highlight the utility of employing social science research
and theory rather than business communicators’ hunches,
lay theories, or best guesses in crafting persuasive appeals.
These ﬁndings also suggest that in order to optimize social
identity effects, it is wise for communicators to ensure that
an important social identity is not only salient but that the
norms associated with the identity are known and also sa-
lient. This, of course, assumes that the true norm is consis-
tent with the direction in which the communicator would
like to move the audience (Cialdini et al. 2006; Schultz et
al. 2007).
The results from the current investigation also indicate
that managers, policy makers, and communicators imple-
menting a descriptive normative component to their per-
suasive appeals or information campaigns should ensure that
the norms of the reference group are as situationally similar
as possible to the intended audience’s circumstances or en-
vironment. For example, our research indicates that if Henny
Youngman had been informed that no one who had previ-
ously stayed in his particular room had ever stolen a single
towel from its washroom, he probably would have had a
much easier time closing his suitcase as he prepared to check
out.
REFERENCES
Aarts, Henk and Ap Dijksterhuis (2003), “The Silence of the Li-
brary: Environment, Situational Norm, and Social Behavior,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84 (1), 18–28.
Bardach, Louis and Bernadette Park (1996), “The Effect of In-
Group/Out-Group Status on Memory for Consistent and In-
consistent Behavior of an Individual,” Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 22 (2), 169–78.
Bearden, William O. and Michael J. Etzel (1982), “Reference
Group Inﬂuence on Product and Brand Purchase Decisions,”
Journal of Consumer Research , 9 (September), 183–94.
Bearden, William O., Richard G. Nettemeyer, and Jesse E. Teel
(1989), “Measurement of Consumer Susceptibility to Interper-
sonal Inﬂuence,” Journal of Consumer Research, 15 (March),
473–81.
Bendapudi, Neeli, Surendra N. Singh, and Venkat Bendapudi
000 JOURNAL OF CONSUMER RESEARCH
(1996), “Enhancing Helping Behavior: An Integrative Frame-
work for Promotion Planning,” Journal of Marketing ,6 0
(July), 33–49.
Brinberg, David and Linda Plimpton (1986), “Self-Monitoring and
Product Conspicuousness on Reference Group Inﬂuence,” in
Advances in Consumer Research, Vol. 13, ed. Richard J. Lutz,
Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 297–300.
Burnkrant, Robert E. and Alain Cousineau (1975), “Informational
and Normative Social Inﬂuence in Buyer Behavior,” Journal
of Consumer Research , 2 (December), 206–15.
Carli, Linda L., Roseanne Ganley, and Amy Pierce-Otay (1991),
“Similarity and Satisfaction in Roommate Relationships,”
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 17 (4), 419–26.
Carlson, Les, Stephen Grove, and Norman Kangun (1993), “A
Content Analysis of Environmental Advertising Claims: A
Matrix Method Approach,” Journal of Advertising , 22 (3),
27–39.
Cialdini, Robert B., Linda J. Demaine, Brad J. Sagarin, Daniel W .
Barrett, Kelton Rhoads, and Patricia L. Winter (2006), “Man-
aging Social Norms for Persuasive Impact,” Social Inﬂuence,
1 (1), 3–15.
Cialdini, Robert B. and Noah J. Goldstein (2004), “Social Inﬂu-
ence: Compliance and Conformity,” Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 55, 591–622.
Cialdini, Robert B., Carl A. Kallgren, and Raymond R. Reno
(1991), “A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: A Theo-
retical Reﬁnement and Reevaluation of the Role of Norms in
Human Behavior,” in Advances in Experimental Social Psy-
chology, Vol. 24, ed. Leonard Berkowitz, San Diego: Aca-
demic Press, 201–34.
Deshpande´, Rohit, Wayne D. Hoyer, and Naveen Donthu (1986),
“The Intensity of Ethnic Afﬁliation: A Study of the Sociology
of Hispanic Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Research ,
13 (2), 214–20.
Festinger, Leon (1954), “A Theory of Social Comparison Pro-
cesses,” Human Relations, 7 (2), 117–40.
Forehand, Mark R. and Rohit Deshpande ´ (2001), “What We See
Makes Us Who We Are: Priming Ethnic Self-Awareness and
Advertising Response,” Journal of Marketing Research ,3 8
(3), 336–48.
Forehand, Mark R., Rohit Deshpande ´, and Americus Reed II
(2002), “Identity Salience and the Inﬂuence of Activation of
the Social Self-Schema on Advertising Response,” Journal
of Applied Psychology , 87 (6), 1086–99.
Goldstein, Noah J. and Robert B. Cialdini (2007), “The Spyglass
Self: A Model of Vicarious Self-Perception,” Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology , 92 (3), 402–17.
Goldstein, Noah J. and Robert B. Cialdini (forthcoming), “Social
Inﬂuences on Consumption and Conservation Behavior,” in
Social Psychology of Consumer Behavior , ed. Michaela
Wa¨nke, New York: Psychology Press.
Griskevicius, Vladas, Noah J. Goldstein, Chad R. Mortensen, Rob-
ert B. Cialdini, and Douglas T . Kenrick (2006), “Going Along
versus Going Alone: When Fundamental Motives Facilitate
Strategic (Non)Conformity,” Journal of Personality and So-
cial Psychology, 91 (2), 281–94.
Heider, Fritz (1958), The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations ,
New York: Wiley.
Hochbaum, Godfrey M. (1954), “The Relation between Group
Members’ Self-Conﬁdence and Their Reactions to Group
Pressures to Uniformity,” American Sociological Review ,1 9
(6), 678–87.
Hogg, Michael A. (2003), “Social Identity,” in Handbook of Self
and Identity, ed. Mark R. Leary and June P. Tangney, New
York: Guilford, 462–79.
Insko, Chester A. (1981), “Balance Theory and Phenomenology,”
in Cognitive Responses in Persuasion , ed. Richard E. Petty,
Thomas M. Ostrom, and Timothy C. Brock, Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum, 309–38.
Kelman, Herbert C. (1961), “Processes of Opinion Change,”Public
Opinion Quarterly, 25 (Spring), 57–78.
Kleine, Robert E., Susan S. Kleine, and Jerome B. Kernan (1993),
“Mundane Consumption and the Self: A Social Identity Per-
spective,” Journal of Consumer Psychology , 2 (3), 209–35.
Maccoby, Eleanor E. (1988), “Gender as a Social Category,” De-
velopmental Psychology, 24 (6), 755–65.
Mackoy, Robert D., Roger Calantone, and Cornelia Droge (1995),
“Environmental Marketing: Bridging the Divide between the
Consumption Culture and Environmentalism,” in Environ-
mental Marketing , ed. Michael J. Polonsky and Alma T .
Mintu-Wimsatt, Binghamton, NY: Haworth, 37–54.
Madrigal, Robert (2001), “Social Identity Effects in Belief Atti-
tudes Intentions Hierarchy: Implications for Corporate Spon-
sorship,” Psychology and Marketing , 18 (2), 145–65.
Menon, Ajay and Anil Menon (1997), “Enviropreneurial Market-
ing Strategy: The Emergence of Corporate Environmentalism
as Market Strategy,” Journal of Marketing , 61 (January),
51–67.
Meyers-Levy, Joan (1988), “The Inﬂuence of Sex Roles on Judg-
ment,” Journal of Consumer Research , 14 (March), 522–30.
Mick, David G. (2006), “Meaning and Mattering through Trans-
formative Consumer Research,” in Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 33, ed. Cornelia Pechmann and Linda L. Price,
Provo, UT: Association for Consumer Research, 297–300.
Moschis, George P. (1976), “Social Comparison and Informal
Group Inﬂuence,” Journal of Marketing Research , 13 (Au-
gust), 237–44.
Murray, David M., Russell V . Luepker, Anderson C. Johnson, and
Maurice B. Mittelmark (1984), “The Prevention of Cigarette
Smoking in Children: A Comparison of Four Strategies,”
Journal of Applied Social Psychology , 14 (3), 274–88.
Park, C. Whan and Parker V . Lessig (1977), “Students and House-
wives: Differences in Susceptibility to Reference Group In-
ﬂuence,” Journal of Consumer Research , 4 (September),
102–10.
Reed, Americus II (2004), “Activating the Self-Importance of
Consumer Selves: Exploring Identity Salience Effects on
Judgments,” Journal of Consumer Research , 31 (Septem-
ber), 286–95.
Robin, Donald P. and Eric Reidenbach (1987), “Social Respon-
sibility, Ethics, and Marketing Strategy: Closing the Gap be-
tween Concept and Application,” Journal of Marketing ,5 1
(January), 44–58.
Schultz, P. Wesley, Jessica M. Nolan, Robert B. Cialdini, Noah J.
Goldstein, and Vladas Griskevicius (2007), “The Construc-
tive, Destructive, and Reconstructive Power of Social Norms,”
Psychological Science, 18 (5), 429–34.
Shapiro, Jenessa R. and Steven L. Neuberg (forthcoming), “When
Do the Stigmatized Stigmatize? The Ironic Effects of Being
Accountable to (Perceived) Majority Group Prejudice-Expres-
sion Norms,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Stayman, Douglas M. and Rohit Deshpande ´ (1989), “Situational
Ethnicity and Consumer Behavior,” Journal of Consumer Re-
search, 16 (December), 361–71.
Stitka, Linda J. and Christina Maslach (1996), “Gender as Sche-
SOCIAL NORMS AND CONSERVATION BEHAVIOR 000
matic Category: A Role Construct Approach,” Social Behav-
ior and Personality , 24 (1), 53–73.
Suedfeld, Peter, Stephen Bochner, and Carol Matas (1971), “Pe-
titioner’s Attire and Petition Signing by Peace Demonstrators:
A Field Experiment,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,
1 (3), 278–83.
Tajfel, Henri (1978), Differentiation between Social Groups: Stud-
ies in the Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations , New
York: Academic.
Terry, Deborah J. and Michael A. Hogg (1996), “Group Norms
and the Attitude-Behaviour Relationship: A Role for Group
Identiﬁcation,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,
22 (8), 776–93.
Terry, Deborah J., Michael A. Hogg, and Katherine M. White
(1999), “The Theory of Planned Behaviour: Self-Identity, So-
cial Identity, and Group Norms,” British Journal of Social
Psychology, 38 (3), 225–44.
White, Katherine M., Michael A. Hogg, and Deborah J. Terry
(2002), “Improving Attitude-Behavior Correspondence
through Exposure to Normative Support from a Salient In-
group,” Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 24 (2), 91–103.
Zebrowitz, Leslie A. (1990), Social Perception, Paciﬁc Grove, CA:
Brooks-Cole.
Zebrowitz, Leslie A., and Mary A. Collins (1997), “Accurate So-
cial Perception at Zero Acquaintance: The Affordances of a
Gibsonian Approach,” Personality and Social Psychology Re-
view, 1 (3), 203–22.