When Choice is Demotivating: Can One Desire Too Much 
of a Good Thing? 
Sheena S. Iyengar 
Columbia University 
Mark R. Lepper 
Stanford University 
Current psychological theory and research affirm the positive affective and motivational consequences of 
having personal choice. These findings have led to the popular notion that the more choice, the 
better--that the human ability to manage, and the human desire for, choice is unlimited. Findings from 3 
experimental studies starkly challenge this implicit assumption that having more choices is necessarily 
more intrinsically motivating than having fewer. These experiments, which were conducted in both field 
and laboratory settings, show that people are more likely to purchase gourmet jams or chocolates or to 
undertake optional class essay assignments when offered a limited array of 6 choices rather than a more 
extensive array of 24 or 30 choices. Moreover, participants actually reported greater subsequent 
satisfaction with their selections and wrote better essays when their original set of options had been 
limited. Implications for future research are discussed. 
Ne quid nimis. (In all things moderation.) 
--Publius Terentius Afer (Terence), c. 171 B.C. 
It is a common supposition in modern society that the more 
choices, the better--that the human ability to manage, and the 
human desire for, choice is infinite. From classic economic theo- 
ries of free enterprise, to mundane marketing practices that provide 
customers with entire aisles devoted to potato chips or soft drinks, 
to important life decisions in which people contemplate alternative 
career options or multiple investment opportunities, this belief 
pervades our institutions, norms, and customs. Ice cream parlors 
compete to offer the most flavors; major fast-food chains urge us 
to "Have it our way." 
Sheena S. Iyengar, Graduate School of Business, Columbia University; 
Mark R. Lepper, Department of Psychology, Stanford University. 
We gratefully acknowledge the cooperation and assistance of Draeger's 
Grocery Store located in Menlo Park, California, for generously offering 
their store as a field site for conducting Study 1. Similarly, Study 2 could 
not have occurred without the cooperation and support of Claude Steele at 
Stanford University who generously allowed his introductory social psy- 
chology course to be used as a forum for conducting this field experiment. 
Further, we would like to thank the numerous graduate students in the 
Department of Psychology at Stanford University and undergraduate re- 
search assistants who generously dedicated their time and effort to help 
conduct these studies. 
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Sheena 
S. Iyengar, Columbia University, Graduate School of Business, Uris Hall- 
Room 714, 3022 Broadway, New York, New York 10027-6902, or to Mark 
R. Lepper, Department of Psychology, Jordan Hall-Building 420, Stanford 
University, Stanford, California 94305-2130. Electronic mail may be sent 
to ss957@columbia.edu or lepper@psych.stanford.edu. 
On the face of it, this supposition seems well supported by 
decades of psychological theory and research that has repeatedly 
demonstrated, across many domains, a link between the provision 
of choice and increases in intrinsic motivation, perceived control, 
task performance, and life satisfaction (Deci, 1975, 1981; Deci & 
Ryan, 1985; Glass & Singer, 1972a, 1972b; Langer & Rodin, 
1976; Rotter, 1966; Schulz & Hanusa, 1978; Taylor, 1989; Taylor 
& Brown, 1988). In a typical laboratory study, the intrinsic moti- 
vation of participants is compared across two conditions: one in 
which participants are given a choice among half a dozen possible 
activities, and a second in which participants are told by an 
experimenter which specific activity to undertake (Zuckerman, 
Porac, Lathin, Smith & Deci, 1978). The recurring empirical 
finding from these studies is that the provision of choice increases 
intrinsic motivation and enhances performance on a variety of 
tasks. 
Moreover, the positive consequences of choice are often appar- 
ent even in contexts where the choice itself is trivial or incidental 
(Cordova & Lepper, 1996; Dember, Galinsky, & Warm, 1992; 
Swann& Pittman, 1977). Indeed, many important theories in 
social psychology, including attribution theory (e.g., Kelley, 1967, 
1973), dissonance theory (e.g., Collins & Hoyt, 1972; Cooper & 
Fazio, 1984; Linder, Cooper, & Jones, 1967), and reactance theory 
(e.g., Brehm, 1966), all presume that even purely illusory percep- 
tions of choice will have powerful effects (Langer, 1975; Lefcourt, 
1973; Lewin, 1952). 
Although prior research has made a compelling case for the 
psychological benefits of the provision of choice, there remain 
some potential limitations to this literature. Consider one seem- 
ingly trivial, yet potentially important, methodological character- 
istic of prior studies: that the number of options presented in 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2000, Vol. 79, No. 6, 995-1006 
Copyright 2000 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0022-3514/00/$5.00 DOI: 10.1037//0022-3514.79.6.995 
995 


996 IYENGAR AND LEPPER 
previous experiments was characteristically small, typically be- 
tween two and six alternatives. It would appear, then, that what 
prior research has actually shown is that choice among relatively 
limited alternatives is more beneficial than no choice at all. Pre- 
sumably, of course, constraints on the number of options offered in 
past choice studies were imposed primarily for the sake of conve- 
nience; however, real-world situations often provide more than a 
limited selection, sometimes even an overwhelming number of 
options. What happens when the range of alternatives becomes 
larger and the differences among options become relatively small? 
Certainly, there are cases when even a vast array of choices may 
still have beneficial effects. Imagine a group of people who arrive 
at a new restaurant, for example, all hoping to order their personal 
favorite dishes. Obviously, the more items offered on the menu, 
the more satisfied these customers will be, on average. More 
generally, in preference-matching contexts, in which people enter 
hoping to find some particular product or service they already 
know themselves to prefer, larger numbers of options should 
increase the likelihood that they will be successful in their search. 
On the other hand, a growing body of research also suggests that 
people can have difficulty managing complex choices. To begin 
with, research has shown that as the attractiveness of alternatives 
rises, individuals experience conflict and as a result tend to defer 
decision, search for new alternatives, choose the default option, or 
simply opt not to choose (Dhar, 1997; Shafir, Simonson, & Tver- 
sky, 1993; Shafir & Tversky, 1992). Furthermore, consumer re- 
search suggests that as both the number of options and the infor- 
mation about options increases, people tend to consider fewer 
choices and to process a smaller fraction of the overall information 
available regarding their choices (Hauser & Wernerfelt, 1990). 
In fact, studies show that the selection, evaluation, and integra- 
tion of information are all clearly affected by the available number 
of options; this suggests that, as the complexity of making choices 
rises, people tend to simplify their decision-making processes by 
relying on simple heuristics (Payne, 1982; Payne, Bettman, & 
Johnson, 1988, 1993; Timmermans, 1993; Wright, 1975). For 
instance, a comparison of the decision strategies of people pre- 
sented with three, six, or nine alternatives revealed that 21% used 
an elimination strategy in the case of three options, 31% used an 
elimination strategy in the case of six options, and 77% used an 
elimination strategy when there were nine options (Timmermans, 
1993). The increase in the percentage of participants who used an 
elimination strategy as the number of alternatives grew was also 
accompanied by a decrease in the percentage of information used. 
This sharp decrease in the number of attributes considered as 
problem complexity increases suggests that information overload 
may produce a change to a noncompensatory but more efficient 
decision rule. 
The three studies presented in this article, therefore, examine for 
the first time the possibility that there may be differential motiva- 
tional consequences of encountering contexts that offer a limited 
(i.e., psychologically manageable), versus an extensive (i.e., psy- 
chologically excessive), number of choices. Specifically, the 
choice overload hypothesis underlying these studies is that, al- 
though the provision of extensive choices may sometimes still be 
seen as initially desirable, it may also prove unexpectedly demo- 
tivating in the end. 
In these studies, limited-choice conditions were operationalized 
as contexts that offered roughly the same number of options 
(approximately six) as used in past research (e.g., Zuckerman et 
al., 1978). In comparison, extensive-choice conditions were opera- 
tionalized as contexts in which participants would have some 
reasonably large, but not ecologically unusual, number of options. 
In addition, to provide a clear test of the choice overload 
hypothesis, several additional methodological considerations 
seemed important. On the one hand, to minimize the likelihood of 
simple preference matching, care was taken to select contexts in 
which most participants would not already have strong specific 
preferences. On the other hand, to minimize the potential impor- 
tance of effortful information search, care was also taken to select 
tasks for which "right" and "wrong" choices would be subjective, 
so that the effort involved in making a choice would be largely a 
function of personal preferences. Finally, across experiments, we 
sought to examine this hypothesis in both field and laboratory 
settings. Using these criteria, then, the present studies tested the 
hypothesis that having a limited and more manageable set of 
choices may be more intrinsically motivating than having an 
overly extensive set of choices. 
Study 1 
In this first field experiment, consumers shopping at an upscale 
grocery store encountered a tasting booth that displayed either a 
limited (6) or an extensive (24) selection of different flavors of 
jam. The two dependent measures of customers' motivation were 
their initial attraction to the tasting booth and their subsequent 
purchasing behavior. 
Method 
Participants and Experimental Site 
Study 1 involved a field experiment that examined the motivational 
consequences of limited versus extensive choice in an upscale grocery 
store (Draeger's Supermarket) located in Menlo Park, California. This 
grocery store is of particular interest because its salient distinguishing 
feature is the extraordinary selection it offers, especially when compared 
with large grocery chains. For instance, Draeger's offers roughly 250 
different varieties of mustard, 75 different varieties of olive oil, and over 
300 varieties of jam. In addition, because of the regular presence of tasting 
booths at this store, shoppers are frequently offered sample tastes of the 
enormous array of available products. As a result, this store provided a 
particularly conducive environment in which a naturalistic experiment that 
used tasting booths could be conducted. 
On two consecutive Saturdays, neither of which fell on a long holiday 
weekend, a tasting booth was set up inside the grocery store. Over the 
course of these two 5-hr experimental periods, the behavior of approxi- 
mately 754 shoppers was observed. Among the 386 customers present in 
the store during the hours when the extensive-choice booth was displayed, 
only 242 actually encountered the display. Among the 368 customers 
present in the store during the hours when the limited-choice booth was 
displayed, only 260 actually encountered the display. By observation, the 
customers who stopped at the booth were typically middle-aged Cauca- 
sians; approximately 62% of these customers were women and 38% were 
men. 
Product Selection 
Exotic jams. Before the study, the number of brands and selections 
within a number of product categories were carefully catalogued. On the 
basis of the following criteria, the product selected as the experimental 


WHEN CHOICE IS DEMOTIVATING 997 
stimulus was Wilkin & Sons (Purveyors to Her Majesty the Queen) jams. 
To control for potential differences that might arise from different types of 
packaging or advertising, it was necessary to find one brand for which there 
was a sufficiently large variety to constitute an extensive-choice condition. 
(In total, Wilkin & Sons has 28 varieties of jams.) In addition, careful 
attention was given to selecting a product with which most consumers 
would be familiar, yet not so familiar that preferences would already be 
ftrmiy established. Hence, to ensure that potential customers would not just 
reach for the more traditional flavors such as strawberry and raspberry, 
these common flavors were removed from the set of 28, leaving a choice 
set of 24 more exotic flavors. Finally, because the dependent measure 
involved purchasing behavior, a relatively inexpensive product needed to 
be chosen. The price of Wilkin & Sons jams ranged from 4 to 6 dollars. 
Jam preferences survey. To ensure that the limited-choice set consisted 
of neither the most preferred nor the least preferred jam flavors, a prelim- 
inary survey of 30 Stanford undergraduates examined individual prefer- 
ences for the 24 flavors of jam. These students were provided a list of 
the 24 exotic jam flavors and were asked, "Please read the following list of 
jams. Put a star next to the two best-sounding jams, in your opinion. Put a 
check mark next to two good but not excellent-sounding jams, and an X 
next to the two worst sounding jams." On the basis of this preliminary 
survey, kiwi and peach jams were selected to represent the two most 
preferred jams, black cherry and three-fruits marmalade were selected to 
represent the moderately tasty jams, and lemon curd and red currant were 
selected to represent the least preferred jams. 
Procedure 
Two research assistants, dressed as store employees, invited passing 
customers to "come try our Wilkin and Sons jams." Shoppers encountered 
one of two displays. On the table were either 6 (limited-choice condition) 
or 24 (extensive-choice condition) different jams. On each of two Satur- 
days, the displays were rotated hourly; the hours of the displays were 
counterbalanced across days to minimize any day or time-of-day effects. 
Initial testing. Consumers were allowed to taste as many jams as they 
wished. All consumers who approached the table received a coupon for a 
$1-discount off the purchase of any Wilkin & Sons jam. Afterwards, any 
shoppers who wished to purchase the jam needed to go to the relevant jam 
shelf, select the jam of their choice, and then purchase the item at the 
store's main cash registers. As a result, regardless of the tasting-booth 
display encountered by each customer, all potential buyers of Wilkin & 
Sons products necessarily encountered the entire display of flavors. 
An inconspicuous observer recorded the number of customers who 
approached the table, as well as the number of passers-by who did not stop. 
A second observer, also unobtrusive, made educated guesses about the 
ethnicity, age, and gender of each customer who did stop at the tasting 
booth. 
In addition, a random sample of solicitations was tape-recorded and later 
presented to two independent raters, unaware of both the conditions and 
hypotheses of the study, who rated each solicitation on a 1-5 Likert scale 
of "friendliness" ranging from not at all friendly to very friendly. Overall, 
the average friendliness score was high (M = 4.5), and the correlation 
between the raters was high, r = .90, p < .0001. Subsequent analyses on 
these scores showed that the solicitations did not vary according to con- 
dition, F(1, 99) = .86, ns. 
Subsequent purchasing. On the bottom left-hand comer of each dis- 
count coupon was a code indicating the condition assignment and gender 
of each consumer. Other numbers and letters surrounded these codes to 
lead customers to believe that the code represented a coupon scan number. 
Coupons could be redeemed over a period of 1 week. 
subsequent purchase of the displayed product. As noted, more 
women than men stopped at the booth; however, there were no 
gender differences by condition, either for initial attraction or for 
subsequent purchasing behavior. 
Initial Attractiveness of Selections 
To what extent does having extensive choice initially seem 
desirable? Of the 242 customers who passed the extensive- 
selection display of jams, 60% (145) actually stopped at the booth. 
In contrast, of the 260 customers who passed the limited-selection 
display of jams, only 40% (104) stopped. Thus, consumers who 
encountered the extensive-choice condition were more attracted to 
the booth than consumers exposed to the limited-choice condition, 
suggesting that the variety provided in the extensive-choice con- 
dition was initially more attractive, 9(2(1, N = 502) = 19.89, p < 
.001.1 
One might imagine that consumers who encountered 24 differ- 
ent jams would sample more flavors than would those who en- 
countered 6 different varieties. In fact, however, there were no 
significant differences, F(1, 245) = 0.83, ns; consumers in the 
extensive-choice condition sampled an average of 1.50 jams 
(range = 1-2), whereas consumers in the limited-choice condition 
sampled an average of 1.38 jams (range = 1-2). 
Subsequent Purchasing Behavior 
Is the initial attractiveness of extensive choice also reflected in 
subsequent purchasing behavior? Our findings suggest not: Nearly 
30% (31) of the consumers in the limited-choice condition subse- 
quently purchased ajar of Wilkin & Sons jam; in contrast, only 3% 
(4) of the consumers in the extensive-choice condition did so, X2(1, 
N = 249) = 32.34, p < .0001. Thus, consumers initially exposed 
to limited choices proved considerably more likely to purchase the 
product than consumers who had initially encountered a much 
larger set of options. 
Discussion 
These findings are striking. Certainly, they appear to challenge 
a fundamental assumption underlying classic psychological theo- 
ries of human motivation and economic theories of rational- 
choice--that having more, rather than fewer, choices is necessarily 
more desirable and intrinsically motivating. The findings from this 
study show that an extensive array of options can at first seem 
highly appealing to consumers, yet can reduce their subsequent 
motivation to purchase the product. Even though consumers pre- 
sumably shop at this particular store in part because of the large 
number of selections available, having "too much" choice seems 
nonetheless to have hampered their later motivation to buy. 
There are, however, several potential limitations to this initial 
field experiment. To begin with, it is possible that consumers in the 
limited-choice condition believed that there was something special 
about the specific six jams displayed, especially after they became 
Results 
The central aim of Study 1 was to examine whether the number 
of options displayed affected consumers' initial attraction to or 
In keeping with current guidelines, because the cell sizes in the present 
studies were substantial (Siegel, 1956) and because there were more than 5 
times as many subjects as there were ceils (Delucchi, 1983), it was not 
deemed necessary to perform a correction for continuity. 


998 IYENGAR AND LEPPER 
aware of the multitude of other options available on the shelf. Such 
a belief could have made the limited-choice consumers more prone 
to purchase jam. Consequently, it is worth considering whether the 
pattern of results would be altered if the limited-choice condition 
were operationalized such that participants were not aware of the 
multitude of other options potentially available. 
In addition, the contrasting displays of jam may have invited 
motivationally differing consumer groups. Although the display 
of 24 jams may have aroused the curiosity of otherwise uninter- 
ested passers-by, the display of 6 jams may have appealed to store 
customers who were more serious about the purchasing of jam. To 
rule out this possibility, it was necessary to examine the motiva- 
tional consequences of limited versus extensive choices with a 
sample of participants who were not given the opportunity to 
self-select their condition assignment. 
Finally, since consumers in both conditions sampled no more 
than two jam flavors, it is possible that the consumers in the 
extensive-choice condition felt that they did not have sufficient 
time to determine their preferences. Although consumers in both 
conditions were allowed the freedom to peruse and to sample as 
many of the displayed flavors as they wished, social pressure or 
time constraints may have prevented them from taking full advan- 
tage of this opportunity. Thus, one might question whether the 
obtained differences in motivation would be eliminated if partic- 
ipants in both conditions were given the opportunity to peruse their 
options in an unconstrained, nonpublic context. 
Study 2 endeavored to address these concerns and to generalize 
the findings from Study 1 to an educational setting, in which 
measures of actual performance, as well as choice, could be 
observed. Thus, in Study 2, participants in the limited-choice 
condition were not aware of any options beyond those in the 
limited-choice set. Similarly, careful attention was given to choos- 
ing a task that enabled participants to spend as much time as they 
wished in perusing their choices. Moreover, unlike Study 1, 
Study 2 employed a yoked design; the limited-choice set was 
rotated such that for every item encountered by an extensive- 
choice participant, there was a limited-choice participant who had 
encountered the same item. 
Study 2 
In Study 2, students in an introductory social psychology class 
were given the opportunity to write a two-page essay as an extra- 
credit assignment. Students were given either 6 or 30 potential 
essay topics on which they could choose to write. Intrinsic moti- 
vation was assessed by comparing the percentage of students who 
completed the assignment across the two conditions and the qual- 
ity of the essays written in each condition. 
Method 
Participants 
One hundred ninety-seven students in an introductory social psychology 
class at Stanford University served as the participants in this study. The 
class included 116 women and 81 men. In addition to attending biweekly 
lectures, all students were required to attend smaller weekly discussion 
sections led by five graduate student teaching assistants. The students were 
divided into 10 discussion sections; each of the five teaching assistants 
led 2 sections. Sections included anywhere from 8 to 26 students. Four 
students ultimately dropped the class and were therefore excluded from the 
analysis. 
Procedures 
As part of the course, all students were required to watch the movie, 
"Twelve Angry Men." Related to this requirement, an extra-credit assign- 
ment was offered, and it was the administration of this extra-credit oppor- 
tunity that provided the context for a naturalistic experiment. 
Before Thanksgiving week, extra-credit assignments were distributed to 
the students. All assignments included the following instructions: 
Instead of having section next week, all students will be required to 
watch a movie being shown in room 40 on Monday, November 25, 
between 7-9 PM. After watching the movie, you can obtain two extra 
credit points on your next midterm examination by writing a response 
paper to the movie. The following is a list of possible questions you 
can write about. Papers should be approximately one to two pages 
typed, double spaced, and are due Tuesday, December 3, in class. If 
you choose to do this assignment, you must circle the paper topic and 
attach this page to your response paper. 
After reading these instructions, students found themselves confronted 
by either 6 different essay topics (limited-choice condition) or 30 different 
essay topics (extensive-choice condition). All essay questions dealt with 
topics related to the material covered in the course. Careful attention was 
given to selecting essay topics that were comparable in difficulty, and 
analyses of performance revealed no differences as a function of the 
specific topic chosen. 
In all, there were six different versions of the extra-credit assignment. In 
addition to the 30-topic assignment, five versions of the 6-topic assignment 
were created, such that all of the items from the list of 30 were counter- 
balanced across the five limited-choice assignments. 
Students were first informed of the movie requirement during the weekly 
section meeting before Thanksgiving week. To minimize the possibility 
that students would notice the different versions, assignments were handed 
out in the section meetings rather than in class lectures. At this time, the 
teaching assistants distributed these assignments, with an identical verbal 
description, reinforcing the information about the opportunity for students 
to gain two extra points on their next midterm. On no occasion were 
students led to believe that their essays would be graded. On the contrary, 
they were explicitly told that their performance on the assignment was 
irrelevant to the receipt of the two points. 
Because each of the five teaching assistants administered two separate 
sections, one of these two sections was assigned to the limited-choice 
condition and the other was assigned to the extensive-choice condition. In 
this way, five sections of students received six essay topics and five 
sections of students received thirty. Because the number of students per 
section varied, it was not possible to assign equal numbers of students to 
the two conditions. As a result, 70 students were assigned to the limited- 
choice condition, whereas 123 students were assigned to the extensive- 
choice condition. No differences were found across the five teaching 
assistants in terms of assignment completion; students assigned to one 
teaching assistant were just as likely to do the extra-credit assignment as 
students assigned to another teaching assistant. 
Dependent Measures 
Two measures assessed students' subsequent motivation in the two 
conditions. The first was the percentage of participants who chose to write 
an essay. The second was the quality of the essays produced. 
As previously indicated, the students were told that their performance on 
these extra-credit assignments would have no impact on their class grades. 
Nevertheless, it was of interest to determine whether the number of 
alternatives available might also affect performance quality. Accordingly, 


WHEN CHOICE IS DEMOTIVATING 999 
two graduate students, unaware of both the participants' choice conditions 
and the hypotheses of this experiment, graded each of the response papers 
for both content and form using two 10-point scales, which ranged from 
"extremely poor" to "excellent. ''2 
When grading for content, two factors were taken into consideration. 
The first was the accurate depiction and appropriate use of social- 
psychological concepts. The second was the use of clear examples from the 
film that related and mapped onto the different social-psychological pro- 
cesses being discussed. The inter-rater correlation for content scores was 
r = .70, p < .0001. The form score similarly assessed students' facility on 
two dimensions. First, each paper was judged on whether it had clear 
structure (e.g., "Did the introductory paragraph define a hypothesis?"). 
Second, the papers were evaluated on technical proficiency--spelling, 
grammar, and the like. The inter-rater correlation for form scores was r = 
.89, p < .0001. Because there was considerable agreement across the two 
graders on both content and form, their ratings were averaged, yielding one 
content and one form score per student. 
Results 
Preliminary Analyses 
The central point of interest in Study 2 lay, once again, in the 
comparison of participants' responses across the two experimental 
conditions of limited versus extensive choice. Because preliminary 
analyses showed no differences as a function of gender and no 
interactions between gender and condition on either measure, the 
data were collapsed across this factor. 
Assignment Completion 
Did the number of choices provided on the instruction sheet 
actually influence the percentage of students who completed the 
assignment? Overall, 65% (126) of the students chose to do the 
assignment. There was, however, a significant effect of condition, 
X2(1, N = 193) -- 3.93, p < .05. Of the 70 students assigned to the 
limited-choice condition, 74% turned in the assignment. In con- 
trast, of the 123 students assigned to the extensive-choice condi- 
tion, only 60% chose to complete the assignment. 
Quality of Essays 
Were these differences in students' willingness to write an essay 
also reflected in differences in the quality of these essays? For 
content, there was a main effect for condition, F(1, 124) = 4.18, 
p < .05. On average, students assigned to the limited-choice 
condition performed slightly, although significantly, better 
(M = 8.13, SD = 0.95) than those assigned to the extensive-choice 
condition (M = 7.79, SD = 0.91). A similar main effect was found 
for form, F(I, 124) = 4.64, p < .03. On average, students in the 
limited-choice condition scored higher (M = 8.04, SD = 1.33) 
than students in the extensive-choice condition (M = 7.59, 
SD = 1.02). 
Because measures of content and form proved significantly 
correlated (r = .52, p < .0001), content and form grades were also 
averaged to give one overall grade. The condition effect was also 
significant for this overall measure, F(1, 124) = 5.65, p < .02, 
with students in the limited-choice condition receiving higher 
grades (M = 8.09, SD = 1.05) than those in the extensive-choice 
condition (M = 7.69, SD = 0.82). 
One might ask whether the observed differences in motivation 
or performance could somehow have been driven by differences in 
students' prior performance in the class. There were, however, no 
differences in class midterm performance by condition among the 
students who completed the extra-credit assignments, nor were 
there differences in midterm performance between those who 
subsequently did or did not choose to do the assignment. 
Discussion 
The findings from Study 2 both confirm and expand on the 
findings from Study 1. The results from both studies suggest that 
the provision of extensive choices does not necessarily lead to 
enhanced motivation when compared with contexts that offer a 
limited array of choices. Quite the opposite seems to be the case. 
In both studies, people actually seemed to prefer to exercise their 
opportunity to choose in contexts where their choices were limited, 
and, in Study 2, they even performed better in such limited-choice 
contexts. 
Particularly counterintuitive, from the perspective of traditional 
models, is the finding that the same choice selected from a limited- 
choice set can lead to better performance than if the same option 
had been selected from an extensive-choice set. Interestingly, in 
contrast to prior studies, the measure of performance in the present 
experiment was designed to reflect intrinsic motivation. Because 
none of the participants thought that their essays would be evalu- 
ated, the quality of the paper they wrote should have been primar- 
ily a function of their personal interest and motivation. 
Thus, the results of Studies 1 and 2 support the hypothesis that 
extensive-choice contexts may be initially more appealing but 
are subsequently more likely to hamper people's intrinsic motiva- 
tion. Although these field experiments provide compelling 
empirical evidence to support this hypothesis, they shed little 
light on the mediating mechanisms underlying choice overload. 
What, then, are the processes that produce the decreases in sub- 
sequent motivation exhibited in contexts that offer extensive 
choices? 
One possibility is that people encountering overly extensive 
choices use a choice-making heuristic that necessarily leads them 
to feel less committed to exercising their preferences. Previous 
research has argued that limited-choice contexts invite people to 
engage in rational optimization--to try to decide which option in 
a set is the single best one for them. By contrast, choosers in 
extensive-choice contexts may endeavor to balance the tradeoffs 
between accuracy and effort, adopting simplifying heuristic strat- 
egies that are much more selective in their use of available infor- 
mation (Christensen-Szalanski, 1978, 1980; Payne et al., 1988, 
1993). Consequently, extensive-choice contexts may invite people 
merely to "satisfice"--to stop when they find any choice that 
seems acceptable (Mills, Meltzer, & Clark, 1977; Simon, 1955, 
1956). In other words, when people have "too many" options to 
consider, they simply strive to end the choice-making ordeal by 
finding a choice that is merely satisfactory, rather than optimal. 
Doing otherwise would demand more effort than seems justified 
by the prospective increase in utility or satisfaction. Hence, one 
2 No actual grade proved lower than a "5," and grades were not restricted 
to whole numbers. 


1000 IYENGAR AND LEPPER 
might predict that people who encounter extensive choices should 
report making a less informed decision and should be more likely 
to opt for a default choice (Hauser & Wernerfelt, 1990; Payne, 
1982; Shafir et al., 1993; Shafir & Tversky, 1992). Similarly, 
choosers opting to satisfice in extensive-choice contexts should 
also report being less confident of their choices and less likely to 
expect to be satisfied with their particular choices. 
A contrasting possibility is that choosers in extensive-choice 
contexts may actually feel more committed to the choice-making 
process; that is, that they may feel more responsible for the choices 
they make because of the multitude of options available. These 
enhanced feelings of responsibility, in turn, may inhibit choosers 
from exercising their choices, out of fear of later regret. In other 
words, choice-makers in extensive-choice contexts might feel 
more responsible for their choices given the potential opportunity 
of finding the very best option, but their inability to invest the 
requisite time and effort in seeking the so-called best option may 
heighten their experience of regret with the options they have 
chosen. If so, choosers in extensive-choice contexts should per- 
ceive the choice-making process to be more enjoyable given 
all the possibilities available. They should at the same time, 
however, find it more difficult and frustrating given the potentially 
overwhelming and confusing amount of information to be 
considered. 
Study 3, therefore, sought both to provide an instantiation of the 
phenomenon of choice overload in a controlled laboratory setting 
and to supplement the findings from the last two studies by 
including a number of measures designed to test the two opposing 
hypotheses outlined above. To test the first hypothesis--that peo- 
ple encountering extensive choices tend to use a satisficing heu- 
ristic, whereas people encountering limited choices tend to use an 
optimizing heuristic--Study 3 examined choosers' expectations 
regarding the choices they had made. 
As before, after participants had encountered either a limited 
array or an extensive array of options in this study, they were asked 
to make a choice. Unlike the prior two studies, however, before 
being given the opportunity to sample the selection they had made, 
choosers' expectations about this choice were assessed. Partici- 
pants provided predictions about how satisfied they would be with 
their stated preference--whether they expected the choice they 
made to be merely "satisfactory" or "among the best." Participants 
also indicated whether they had chosen a default option and 
reported how well-informed they felt about the choice they had 
made. To test the second hypothesis--that people in extensive- 
choice contexts feel more responsible for the choices they make-- 
several affect items were added to Study 3. Specifically, after 
making their choices, but before sampling their choices, partici- 
pants were asked to provide ratings of their enjoyment, difficulty, 
and frustration during the choice-making process. Later, after 
sampling their choices, they provided ratings of satisfaction and 
regret. 
Finally, Study 3 also included a no-choice control condition. 
Inclusion of this third group allowed us to examine whether 
differences between the limited- and extensive-choice groups were 
the result of increases in motivation among limited-choice partic- 
ipants and/or decreases in motivation among extensive-choice 
participants. 
Study 3 
In Study 3, participants initially made a selection from either a 
limited array or an extensive array of chocolates. Subsequently, 
participants in the experimental groups sampled the chocolate of 
their choosing, whereas participants in the control group sampled 
a chocolate that was chosen for them. Participants' initial satisfac- 
tion with the choosing process, their expectations concerning the 
choices they had made, their subsequent satisfaction with their 
sampled chocolates, and their later purchasing behavior served as 
the four main dependent measures in this study. 
Conceptually, then, the design of Study 3 involved three groups: 
limited choice, extensive choice, and a no-choice control condi- 
tion. Because it seemed important to control for the number of 
alternatives presented across the choice and no-choice conditions, 
half of the participants in the no-choice conditions were shown the 
same 6 choices as participants in the limited-choice condition, 
whereas the other half were shown the full array of 30 choices, as 
were participants in the extensive-choice condition. 
Because the choice-condition participants and their no-choice 
counterparts were treated identically up through the administration 
of the first set of dependent measures, analyses of these measures 
will involve only comparisons of those exposed to limited displays 
versus those exposed to extensive displays. Once participants had 
been given either their own selection or an arbitrarily assigned 
chocolate to taste, however, comparisons of limited-choice and 
extensive-choice participants to those in the no-choice control 
condition then became relevant. 
Method 
Participants 
One hundred thirty-four students from Columbia University were ran- 
domly assigned to one of three conditions. There were 33 participants in 
the limited-choice condition, 34 participants in the extensive-choice con- 
dition, and 67 participants in the no-choice condition. This sample included 
63% women and 37% men. The ethnic distribution of the participants was 
55% Caucasian, 25% Asian, 5% Latino, 4% African American, and 11% 
Other. 
To eliminate any participant who might have an aversion to chocolate, 
all potential participants were prescreened on the basis of two questions. 
First, all potential participants were asked, "Do you like chocolate?" Only 
those who responded "yes" to this item were then recruited to be partici- 
pants in this study. Second, participants were asked, "How often do you eat 
Godiva chocolates?" Responses were coded as "never," "occasionally," or 
"frequently." Because it was believed that high familiarity with Godiva 
flavors and varieties might confound a participant's behavior within this 
study, only those participants who responded "never" or "occasionally" 
were recruited for this study. Approximately 92% of all potential partici- 
pants met these two criteria and were invited to be part of the study. 
Instruments 
Decision-making measures. A questionnaire was designed to examine 
participants' affective responses to the choice-making process and their 
expectations after making a choice. To prevent participants' responses 
from being biased by the outcome of their choice, we asked them to 
complete the questionnaire after they had chosen which chocolates they 
wished to sample, but before they had been given the opportunity to sample 
their choice. All items called for ratings on a Likert scale ranging from 1 
(not at all) to 7 (extremely). 


WHEN CHOICE IS DEMOTIVATING 1001 
To test the hypothesis that people encountering extensive choices can 
experience the choice-making process as both enjoyable and overwhelm- 
ing, the questionnaire examined participants' perceptions of the choice- 
making process. Specifically, participants were asked about the extent to 
which they felt the choice-making process had been enjoyable ("How 
much did you enjoy making the choice?"), difficult ("Did you find it 
difficult to make your decision of which chocolate to pick?"), or frustrating 
("How frustrated did you feel when making the choice?"). They also 
predicted how satisfied they would be if they had the opportunity to sample 
their chosen chocolate ("How satisfied do you think you will be if you 
sample this chocolate?"). 
To evaluate whether people encountering limited choices are more likely 
to optimize (i.e., to seek the very best option) whereas people encountering 
extensive choices are more likely to satisfice (i.e., to accept any satisfactory 
option), two items were created to examine participants' expectations 
regarding their choices. To measure perceived satisficing, we asked par- 
ticipants to provide ratings for, "How confident are you that this chocolate 
will satisfy you?" To examine perceived optimizing, we asked "How 
confident are you that this chocolate will be among the best you've ever 
had?" Similarly, to evaluate whether people in an extensive-choice context 
feel less informed and are therefore more prone to choose a default option, 
we also asked participants, "Do you feel that you made a well-informed 
decision on the chocolate you picked?" and, "Is this a chocolate that you 
would normally pick?" 
Sample-satisfaction measures. The satisfaction measures were de- 
signed to inquire about participants' overall satisfaction with their sampled 
chocolates. Specifically, these questions assessed participants' actual sat- 
isfaction with the chocolate they had consumed, their regrets about the 
chocolate they had tasted, and their satisfaction with the number of choices 
they had been given. Experimental participants reported their satisfaction 
with their chosen samples, of course, whereas control participants reported 
their satisfaction with a chocolate that had been chosen for them. 
To test the hypothesis that participants exposed to extensive choices 
would be less satisfied with their choices than participants exposed to 
limited choices, three items examined participants' satisfaction with their 
sampled chocolates: "How satisfied were you with the chocolate you 
tasted?", "How much did you enjoy the sample you tasted?", and, "How 
tasty was the chocolate you sampled?" All responses were given on Likert 
scales, ranging from 1 (not at all) to 7 (extremely). 
Similarly, to test whether any potential decrease in satisfaction among 
people encountering overly extensive choices would be accompanied by an 
increase in regret, two items were included to measure regret: "How much 
do you regret eating the chocolate you tasted?" and "Do you think that 
there were chocolates on the table that tasted much better?" Both items 
were answered on 7-point Likert scales, ranging from 1 (no, not at all) to 7 
(yes, completely). 
Because one can only infer through behavioral measures in Studies 1 
and 2 whether 30 or 24 choices actually constituted an overly extensive 
choice set, Study 3 included a manipulation check in which participants 
were asked their perceptions about the number of choices provided. Spe- 
cifically, participants were asked: "When initially given the task to pick a 
chocolate from the display, do you think the selection should have included 
more kinds of chocolates?" Responses were given on a 7-point Likert scale, 
with 1 being, l felt that I had too few to choose from, 4 being, I had the 
right number of choices to choose from, and 7 being, No, I had too many 
to choose from. 
Demographic measures. At the conclusion of the experiment, all par- 
ticipants completed a brief demographics questionnaire. This questionnaire 
inquired about participants' age, ethnicity, gender, and affiliation with 
Columbia University. 
Experimental Procedures 
As participants entered the laboratory, the experimenter directed them to 
sit at a round table on which there was one of two different displays of 
chocolates. In the limited-choice display, participants encountered one row 
of 6 different flavors of Godiva chocolates; in the extensive-choice display, 
participants encountered 30 different chocolates, arranged in five rows 
of 6. Next to each chocolate was a label indicating its "official," Godiva 
name (e.g., "Grand Marnier Truffle"). When designating the composition 
of the five rows, careful attention was given to ensuring that similar flavors 
were not in the same row (e.g., a Strawberry Cordial would not be assigned 
to the same group as the Raspberry Cordial). In those conditions in which 
participants encountered only six chocolates, the five groups were rotated 
such that for every chocolate encountered in the extensive-choice display 
there was a possibility of the same chocolate being encountered in the 
limited-choice display. 
The experimenter gave participants the following cover story for the 
study: "We're doing a marketing research study that examines how people 
select chocolates. What I would like you to do is take a look at the names 
of the chocolates and the chocolates themselves, and tell me which one you 
would buy for yourself." All participants then proceeded to choose the 
chocolate they would wish to have. 
Because prior research suggests that people making a choice among four 
alternatives sometimes take less time than people making a selection 
between two (Hendrick, Mills, & Kiesler, 1968; Kiesler, 1966), the amount 
of time spent deciding which chocolate to sample was also recorded in this 
study. Once the participants pointed to a chocolate, they were asked to 
complete the decision-making measures described above. 
Next, participants encountered the manipulation of choice. In the two 
choice conditions, the experimenter offered the participants the opportunity 
to sample the chocolate they had chosen. In contrast, in the no-choice 
condition, the participants were not permitted to sample the chocolate they 
had chosen but were instead told, "We have some sample chocolates that 
have been chosen for you at random. These are [e.g.,] 'Milk Chocolate 
Truffles'." The experimenter then opened a box containing eight identical 
chocolates, which were not of the participants' choosing, and asked the 
participants to take one. As in prior studies (Zuckerman et al., 1978), we 
used a yoked design, so that the same chocolates chosen by participants in 
the choice conditions were the ones offered to participants in the no-choice 
condition. 
After sampling the chocolate, participants completed the sample satis- 
faction measures and the demographics questionnaire described above. 
Next, the experimenter led the participant to believe that the experiment 
had concluded, saying, "Thanks. We appreciate your time. You can go see 
the manager for your compensation in room three." 
In the payment room, a second experimenter, unaware of the condition 
assignments, greeted the participants. This experimenter offered the subject 
a choice of receiving a payment of either 5 dollars or a box containing four 
Godiva chocolates ordinarily priced at 5 dollars: "As you know, your 
compensation is five dollars for being in the study. You can choose 
between getting five dollars in cash or a box of Godiva chocolates that is 
worth five dollars. Which one would you like for participating in the 
survey?" Boxes bearing the emblem of Godiva were visible to the partic- 
ipants as they walked into the room. The number of participants who opted 
for the box of chocolates constituted the final dependent measure. 
One potential problem with these experimental procedures is that al- 
though the first experimenters were unaware of the hypotheses underlying 
the study, they were necessarily aware of the experimental manipulations. 
As a result, one might reasonably wonder whether the experimenters might 
vary their behavior across conditions. Therefore, all experimental sessions 
were videotaped, and 40 sessions (10 from each choice condition and 20 
from the no-choice condition) were randomly selected for coding by 
external raters. Two raters unaware of the hypotheses and the experimental 
manipulations rated the friendliness of the two experimenters across the 
forty sessions on a 5-point Likert scale. There was considerable agreement 
across the two raters (r = .69, p < .0001), and their responses were 
therefore averaged. This average friendliness score (M = 2.86, SD = 0.78) 


1002 IYENGAR AND LEPPER 
did not vary by condition, F(2, 36) = .01, ns, and there were no interactions 
between condition and experimenter, F(2, 36) = .22, ns. 
Results 
Preliminary Analyses 
Our primary aim in Study 3 was to examine differences in 
satisfaction, purchasing behavior, and related measures across 
limited-choice, extensive-choice, and no-choice conditions. Before 
turning to these central issues, however, we first examined the 
effects of gender and ethnicity on these various measures. No 
significant differences were observed on any of the dependent 
variables as a function of these factors. Nor were there any sig- 
nificant interactions between these two factors and experimental 
conditions. Hence, the data were collapsed across these demo- 
graphic variables. 3 
Finally, preliminary analyses also provided an empirical exam- 
ination of two key presumptions underlying our main analyses. As 
should be expected, for those measures obtained before the intro- 
duction of the choice manipulation, there were no significant 
interactions between the size of the choice set and participants' 
later receipt of their own selection or an arbitrary alternative. 
Similarly, as predicted, there were no significant differences on 
measures obtained after the choice manipulation between no- 
choice participants previously exposed to a limited versus an 
extensive set of available alternatives. Data for the relevant mea- 
sures were therefore collapsed, as appropriate, across these factors. 
Manipulation Checks 
Choosing time. As one might assume, the amount of time 
spent deciding which chocolate to sample varied significantly by 
condition, F(1, 131) = 77.02, p < .0001. Contrary to some prior 
findings (Hendrick et al., 1968; Kiesler, 1966), participants spent 
significantly more time (in seconds) deciding which chocolate to 
sample when there were 30 chocolates (M _ 24.36, SD = 12.99) 
than they did when there were only six (M = 8.91, SD = 6.02). 
However, it should be noted that, unlike this study, previous 
studies only compared choosing times across much smaller choice 
sets of two versus four alternatives. 
Perception of choices. Similarly, we examined participants' 
responses to the question concerning whether they felt the number 
of choices available was too few, just right, or too many. Here 
again, there was a significant effect for the number of options 
presented, F(1, 132) = 43.68, p < .0001, Participants who en- 
countered 30 chocolates reported feeling that they had been given 
"too many" (M = 4.88, SD = 1.20), whereas participants who 
encountered 6 chocolates reported feeling that the number of 
alternatives was "about right" (M = 3.61, SD = 1.01). These data 
provide direct evidence for our assumption that 30 chocolates 
would seem an overly extensive choice set. 
that they had chosen a satisfactory chocolate versus one of the very 
best chocolates did not vary as a function of the number of 
chocolates displayed. The results revealed no differences by con- 
dition for questions regarding goals of either satisficing, F(1, 
94) = 0.15, ns, or optimizing, F(1, 94) = 0.09, ns. Instead, a 
within-subject analysis of variance (ANOVA) suggested that both 
the limited- and extensive-choice participants were predictably 
more confident that their chocolate selection would satisfy them 
(M = 5.67, SD = 1.21) than that it would be among the best they 
had ever had (M = 4.16, SD = 1.59), F(1, 190) = 54.75, p < 
.0001. 
Nor were there any differences in anticipated satisfaction. Re- 
sults indicate that baseline predictions of likely satisfaction did not 
vary by condition, F(1, 132) = 0.61, ns, suggesting that partici- 
pants did not perceive the number of available alternatives to he an 
important variable in their expected satisfaction with their choices. 
In addition, we observed no differences by condition in partic- 
ipants' reports of how informed they felt about their choices or in 
their tendency to choose default options. Both extensive-choice 
and limited-choice participants reported being moderately well 
informed (M = 4.53, SD = 1.39), F(1, 132) = 0.14, ns. Likewise, 
there were no differences in participants' responses to the question 
of whether they chose a chocolate that they would normally pick, 
F(1, 132) = 0.24, ns. 
Desirability of choosing. Is it possible for people to experience 
extensive choices as being both more enjoyable and more over- 
whelming? Consistent with the findings of Study 1, participants 
encountering the extensive options (M = 6.02, SD = 0.75) re- 
ported enjoying the decision-making process significantly more 
than participants who encountered limited options (M = 4.72, 
SD = 1.36), F(1, 132) = 47.01, p < .0001. Yet, participants 
offered extensive choices (M = 4.45, SD = 1.79) also reported 
finding the decision-making process to be more difficult than did 
participants offered more limited choices (M = 3.30, SD = 1.49), 
F(1,132) = 16.38, p < .0001. Likewise, extensive-choice partic- 
ipants (M = 3.10, SD = 1.77) also reported finding the decision- 
making process to be more frustrating than did limited-choice 
participants (M = 2.24, SD = 1.72), F(1,123) = 7.61, p < .007. 
Interestingly, there was no significant correlation between the 
extent to which participants reported enjoying decision-making 
and the extent to which they found the decision process to be 
difficult (r = .11, ns) or frustrating (r = .11, ns). How difficult 
participants found the decision-making process, however, was 
correlated with the extent to which they found the process to be 
frustrating (r = .36, p < .0001). Thus, it appears that people can 
indeed find choosing among too many alternatives to be both 
enjoyable and overwhelming. 
Subsequent Satisfaction 
Five questions assessed participants' actual subsequent satisfac- 
tion with the particular sample chocolate they were given to taste. 
Decision-Making Measures 
Satisficing versus optimizing. Were participants in the 
extensive-choice condition more apt to satisfice, and were partic- 
ipants in the limited-choice condition more apt to optimize? We 
find no empirical evidence to support such a hypothesis. Contrary 
to prior predictions (Mills et al., 1977), participants' confidence 
3 Preliminary analyses also asked whether certain chocolates were more 
preferred than the rest. While no chocolate was universally chosen, there 
were four chocolates that were never selected. An examination of the 
frequency distribution reveals that none of the thirty chocolates was se- 
lected more than 12.7% of the time and that the specific choices did not 
differ by condition. 


WHEN CHOICE IS DEMOTIVATING 1003 
Three of these items (i.e., tastiness, enjoyment, and satisfaction) 
assessed subjective enjoyment directly. Because these questions 
proved significantly correlated with one another (average r = .62, 
p < .0001) and the pattern of results was similar across the three, 
a composite enjoyment measure was derived by averaging across 
these three items for each participant. Two other items assessed 
participants' feelings of regret about the chocolate they had tasted. 
These two items also proved significantly correlated (r = .41, p < 
.0001) and were combined into a composite regret measure. Fi- 
nally, because these two composite measures (i.e., "enjoyment" 
and "regret") proved to be highly related (r = -.55, p < .0001), 
a single overall sample-satisfaction score was created for each 
participant by averaging these components (with regret scores, of 
course, being coded negatively). It should be noted that the three 
items that constitute the satisfaction measure were converted into 
z scores before averaging, as were the two items constituting the 
regret measure. 
A one-way ANOVA on these overall satisfaction scores yielded 
significant differences among conditions, as in the prior studies, 
F(I, 122) = 28.02, p < .0001. Tukey comparisons further showed 
that, in keeping with the results from Studies 1 and 2, participants 
in the limited-choice condition were significantly more satisfied 
(M = 6,28, SD = 0.54) with their sampled chocolates than were 
participants in the extensive-choiee condition (M = 5.46, 
SD = 0.82). Tukey comparisons further revealed that on this 
measure, participants in both choice groups reported themselves to 
be more satisfied with their chosen chocolates than did no-choice 
participants (M = 4.92, SD = 0.98), who had been given samples 
of chocolates they had not selected. 
Purchasing Behavior 
Finally, as in the previous studies, we also examined the effects 
of limited versus extensive choices on participants' ultimate pur- 
chasing behavior. Once again, the results demonstrated the signif- 
icant advantages of a relatively small choice set, X2(2, N = 
134) = 21.84, p < .0001. In particular, participants in the limited- 
choice condition (48%) were significantly more likely to choose 
chocolates as compensation, as compared with participants in both 
the extensive-choice condition (12%), X2(1, N --- 67) = 10.78, p < 
.001, and the no-choiee condition (10%), X2(1, N = 100) = 18.06, 
p < .0001, which, on this behavioral measure, clearly did not 
differ from one another. 
General Discussion 
In 1830, Alexis de Tocqueville commented that, "In America I 
have seen the freest and best educated of men in circumstances the 
happiest to be found in the world; yet it seemed to me that a cloud 
habitually hung on their brow, and they seemed serious and almost 
sad even in their pleasures" (p. 536). More than 100 years later, we 
are confronted by an empirical instantiation of what some have 
referred to as "the tyranny of choice" (Schwartz, 2000). 
The three studies described in this report demonstrate for the 
first time the possibility that, although having more choices might 
appear desirable, it may sometimes have detrimental consequences 
for human motivation. Studies 1, 2, and 3 provide compelling 
empirical evidence that the provision of extensive choices, though 
initially appealing to choice-makers, may nonetheless undermine 
choosers' subsequent satisfaction and motivation. Study 1 showed 
that although more consumers were attracted to a tasting booth 
when the display included 24 flavors of jam rather than 6, con- 
sumers were subsequently much more likely to purchase jam if 
they had encountered the display of only 6 jams. Study 2 revealed 
that students in an introductory college level course were more 
likely to write an essay for extra credit when they were provided 
a list of only 6, rather than 30, potential essay topics. Moreover, 
even after having chosen to write an essay, students wrote higher 
quality essays if their essay topic had been picked from a smaller 
rather than a larger choice set. Finally, Study 3 demonstrated that 
people reported enjoying the process of choosing a chocolate more 
from a display of 30 than from a display of 6. However, despite 
their greater initial enjoyment in the extensive-display condition, 
participants proved more dissatisfied and regretful of the choices 
they made and were subsequently considerably less likely to 
choose chocolates rather than money as compensation for their 
participation. 
But, what are the mediating mechanisms underlying this phe- 
nomenon of choice overload? Contrary to the predictions of our 
first hypothesis, we found no empirical support in Study 3 for the 
theory that choosers in extensive-choice contexts are more likely 
to use a satisficing heuristic, whereas choosers in a limited-choice 
context are more likely to use an optimizing heuristic. Instead, at 
least in this study, choosers in both extensive-choice contexts and 
limited-choice contexts tended to report using a satisficing heuris- 
tic. Nor were there any differences in participants' reports of their 
anticipated satisfaction with the selections they had made, their 
feelings of having made an informed choice, or their tendency to 
opt for a default choice. 
Consistent with our second hypothesis, however, we did find 
considerable empirical support for the theory that choosers in 
extensive-choice contexts enjoy the choice-making process 
more--presumably because of the opportunities it affords--but 
also feel more responsible for the choices they make, resulting in 
frustration with the choice-making process and dissatisfaction with 
their choices. Indeed, participants in the extensive-choice condi- 
tion reported experiencing the decision-making process as being 
simultaneously more enjoyable, more difficult, and more frustrat- 
ing. Later, after actually sampling their chocolates, extensive- 
choice participants reported being more dissatisfied and having 
more regret about the choices they had made than did limited- 
choice participants. This greater dissatisfaction and regret exhib- 
ited by extensive-choice participants may be the consequence of an 
initial greater tendency to disengage from the choice-making pro- 
cess, which later results in the choosers' inability to use the 
psychological processes for the enhancement of the attractiveness 
of their own choices (see Gilovich & Medvec, 1995). Even more 
compelling, participants in the extensive-choice condition were 
actually less likely to opt for chocolates rather than money as their 
compensation than were their limited-choice counterparts, and 
they did not differ in this respect from participants in the no-choice 
control condition. 
How can there be so much dissatisfaction in the face of so much 
opportunity? More than providing a conclusive answer to this 
question, the present findings raise a number of questions of both 
theoretical and practical relevance that are worth considering in 
future research. 


1004 IYENGAR AND LEPPER 
Perhaps it is not that people are made unhappy by the decisions 
they make in the face of abundant options but that they are instead 
unsure--that they are burdened by the responsibility of distin- 
guishing good from bad decisions. Interviews with several hundred 
U.S. citizens suggest that modern Americans are uneasy about 
their current life decisions--that they do not seem to know 
whether they are doing the right things with their lives, or even 
what those "right things" are (BeUah, Madsen, Sullivan, Swindler 
& Tipton, 1985). Our findings demonstrate that the offer of overly 
extensive choices in relatively trivial choice-making contexts can 
have significant demotivating effects, but perhaps the phenomenon 
of choice overload may be further exacerbated in contexts (such as 
decisions about major stock purchases or alternative medical treat- 
ments) in which (a) the costs associated with making the "wrong" 
choice, or even beliefs that there are truly "wrong" choices, are 
much more prominent, and/or (b) substantial time and effort would 
be required for choosers to make truly informed comparisons 
among alternatives. In the present studies, care was taken to select 
tasks for which "right" and "wrong" choices would be subjective 
and for which the effort involved in making a choice would be 
largely a function of personal preferences. If one were to compare 
the present contexts to those in which the choosers perceived there 
to be significantly "better" and "worse" choices, in domains of 
personal significance, we might expect even more substantial 
choice overload effects. 
Indeed, whether choosers perceive their choice-making task to 
be a search for the "objectively best" option, or a search for the one 
option most reflective of their personal preferences, may funda- 
mentally influence their very preference for choosing. Although 
prior research has indicated that people will necessarily be intrin- 
sically motivated to make their own choices, the more choosers 
perceive their choice-making task to necessitate expert informa- 
tion, the more they may be inclined not to choose, and further, they 
may even surrender the choice to someone else--presumably more 
expert (e.g., de Charms, 1968; Deci & Ryan, 1985; Langer & 
Rodin, 1976; Lepper, 1983; Malone & Lepper, 1987; Schulz, 
1976; Taylor, 1989; Zuckerman et al., 1978). In Schwartz's (1994) 
terms, one important paradox confronting the modern world is that 
as the freedom of individuals expands, so too does their depen- 
dence on institutions and other people. 
Similarly, if the identity of the choice recipient were varied, we 
might observe variation in the experience of choice overload 
among the choosers. Prior research has shown that, when con- 
fronted by choices that are anticipated to result in regret, choosers 
experience decision aversion more so when making choices for 
others--even when the others exhibit no preferences--than when 
making choices for themselves (Beattie, Baron, Hershey, & 
Spranca, 1994). In the three present studies, we did not systemat- 
ically vary the identity of the choice recipients. Consistent with the 
results of Beattie and his colleagues, we might expect that if we 
were to compare choosers making choices for themselves with 
choosers making choices for others, the latter would show greater 
choice overload effects in extensive-choice contexts. 
Perhaps the experience of choice overload is accompanied by 
the use of more decision rules, which are affective rather than 
cognitive. Contrary to recent findings by Dhar and Nowlis (1999), 
the results from our studies suggest that even when a choice- 
making situation involves an approach-approach conflict, the pro- 
vision of choices with uniquely good features does not appear to 
minimize decision aversion. Being confronted by a plethora of 
options, each possessing unique attributes, may instead simulta- 
neously attract and repel choice-makers. One wonders then: Do 
people use affective experiences aroused by choosing as a heuristic 
for deciding how they ultimately feel about the product? If not 
such an affective "bleedover," then what else might be accounting 
for these effects? 
Moreover, even when choices are self-generated, it is possible 
that overly extensive choices may have demotivating conse- 
quences. Because people seem to enjoy extensive-choice contexts 
more than limited-choice contexts, they may sometimes prefer to 
make available to themselves many more choices than they can 
possibly handle. Hence, it would be of considerable theoretical 
interest to examine the effects of extensive-choice contexts that are 
self-generated, rather than externally generated as in the present 
studies. 
Finally, it is worth considering attributes of contexts in which 
the provision of extensive choices does not lead to choice over- 
load. To minimize the likelihood of simple preference-matching in 
the present studies, we selected specific choice-making tasks and 
prescreened our participant population to ensure that they would 
not already have strong specific preferences. We all know people 
who, when confronted by an extraordinary variety of options, 
know exactly what they want. Is this certainty in preference the 
result of arduously developed and maintained expertise? The ulti- 
mate paradox might be that the only circumstance in which choos- 
ers are truly comfortable with extensive choices is when, because 
of the chooser's previous experience, these choices are perceived 
as limited in number. Therefore, the precise number of options that 
would be considered reasonable, as opposed to excessive, may 
vary as a function of both the chooser's perception of their choice- 
making goals and their prior expertise with the subject of choice. 
Having unlimited options, then, can lead people to be more 
dissatisfied with the choices they make. Although such a finding 
may seem counterintuitive to social psychologists long schooled in 
research on the benefits of choice, the commercial world seems 
already to know what experimental psychologists are just now 
discovering. Several major manufacturers of a variety of consumer 
products have been streamlining the number of options they pro- 
vide customers. Proctor & Gamble, for example, reduced the 
number of versions of its popular Head and Shoulders shampoo 
from 26 to 15, and they, in turn, experienced a 10% increase in 
sales (Osnos, 1997). Indeed, even to many of today's humorists, 
this phenomenon seems already well known. Consider Bill Watter- 
son's (1996) portrayal of one particularly exasperated grocery 
shopper: 
Look at this peanut butter! There must be three sizes of five brands of 
four consistencies! Who demands this much choice? I know! I'll quit 
my job and devote my life to choosing peanut butter! Is "chunky" 
chunky enough or do ! need EXTRA chunky? I'll compare ingredi- 
ents! I'll compare brands! I'I1 compare sizes and prices! Maybe I'll 
drive around and see what other stores have! So much selection, and 
so little time! (p. 107) 


WHEN CHOICE IS DEMOTIVATING 1005 
References 
Beattie, J., Baron, J., Hershey, J. C., & Spranca, M. D. (1994). Psycho- 
logical determinants of decision attitude. Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making, 7, 129-144. 
Bellah, R., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W., Swindler, A., & Tipton, S. (1985). 
Habits of the heart. Los Angeles: University of California Press. 
Bovie, P. (Ed.) (1992). Terence: The comedies. Baltimore and London: 
Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Christeusen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1978). Problem solving strategies: A selec- 
tion mechanism, some implications, and some data. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance, 22, 307-323. 
Christensen-Szalanski, J. J. J. (1980). A further examination of the selec- 
tion of problem-solving strategies: The effects of deadlines and analytic 
aptitudes. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25, 107- 
122. 
Collins, B. E., & Hoyt, M. G. (1972). Personal responsibility for conse- 
quences: An integration and extension of the "forced compliance" lit- 
erature. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 8, 558-593. 
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at dissonance theory. In L. 
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 17, 
pp. 229-266). Orlando, FL: Academic Press. 
Cordova, D. I., & Lepper, M. R. (1996). Intrinsic motivation and the 
process of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization, personaliza- 
tion, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 715-730. 
de Charms, R. (1968). Personal causation. New York: Academic Press. 
Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum Press. 
Deci, E. L. (1981). The psychology of self-determination. Lexington, MA: 
Heath. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self- 
determination in human behavior. New York: Plenum Press. 
Delucchi, K. L. 0983). The use and misuse of chi-square: Lewis and Burke 
revisited. Psychological Bulletin, 94, 166-176. 
Dember, W. N., Galinsky, T. L., & Warm, J. S. (1992). The role of choice 
in vigilance performance. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 30, 
201-204. 
de Tocqueville, A. (1969). Democracy in America. New York: Harper & 
Row. (Original work published in 1830) 
Dhar, R. (1997). Consumer preference for a no-choice option. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 24, 215-231. 
Dhar, R., & Nowlis, S. (1999). The effect of time pressure on consumer 
choice deferral. Journal of Consumer Research, 25, 369-384. 
Gilovich, T., & Medvec, V. H. (1995). The experience of regret: What, 
when, and why. Psychological Review, 102, 379-395. 
Glass, D. C., & Singer, J. E. (1972a). Stress and adaptation: Experimental 
studies of behavioral effects of exposure to aversive events. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Glass, D. C., & Singer, J. E. (1972b). Urban stress. New York: Academic 
Press. 
Hauser, J. R., & Wernerfelt, B. (1990). An evaluation cost model of 
consideration sets. Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 393-408. 
Hendrick, C., Mills, M., & Kiesler, C. A. (1968). Decision time as a 
function of the number and complexity of equally attractive alternatives. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 313-318. 
Kelley, H. H. (1967). Attribution theory in social psychology. In D. Levine 
(Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 15, pp. 192-240). 
Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. 
Kelley, H. H. (1973). The process of causal attribution. American Psychol- 
ogist, 28, 107-128. 
Kiesler, C. A. (1966). Conflict and number of choice alternatives. Psycho- 
logical Reports, 18, 603-610. 
Langer, E. J. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 32, 311-328. 
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced 
personal responsibility for the aged: A field experiment in an institu- 
tional setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 191- 
198. 
Lefcourt, H. M. (1973). The function of the illusions of control and 
freedom. American Psychologist, 28, 417-425. 
Lepper, M. R. (1983). Social control processes and the internalization of 
social values: An attributional perspective. In E. T. Higgins, D. N. 
Ruble, & W. W. Hartup (Eds.), Social cognition and social development 
(pp. 294-330). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Lewin, K. (1952). Group decision and social change. In G. E. Swanson, 
T. M. Newcomb, & E. L. Hartley (Eds.), Readings in social psychology 
(pp. 459-473). New York: Henry Holt. 
Linder, D. E., Cooper, J., & Jones, E. E. (1967). Decision freedom as a 
determinant of the role of incentive magnitude in attitude change. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 6, 245-254. 
Malone, T. W., & Lepper, M. R. (1987). Making learning fun: A taxonomy 
of intrinsic motivations for learning. In R. E. Snow & M. J. Farr (Eds.), 
Aptitude, learning and instruction: Vol. 3. Cognitive and affective pro- 
cess analysis (pp. 223-253). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Mills, J., Meltzer, R., & Clark, M. (1977). Effect of number of options on 
recall of information supporting different decision strategies. Personal- 
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin, 3, 213-218. 
Osnos, E. (1997, September 27). Too many choices? Firms cut back on 
new products. Philadelphia Inquirer, D1, D7. 
Payne, J. (1982). Contingent decision behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 
382-402. 
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1988). Adaptive strategy 
selection in decision making. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 534-552. 
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive 
decision maker. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external 
locus of control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80, 1-28. 
Schulz, R. (1976). Effects of control and predictability on the physical and 
psychological well-being of the institutionalized aged. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 33, 563-573. 
Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B. H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and 
predictability-enhancing interventions: Findings and ethical issues. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1194-1201. 
Schwartz, B. (1994). The costs of living: How market freedom erodes the 
best things in life. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. 
Schwartz, B. (2000). Self-determination: The tyranny of freedom. Ameri- 
can Psychologist, 55, 79-88. 
Shafir, E., Simonson, I., & Tversky, A. (1993). Reason-based choice. 
Cognition, 49, 11-36. 
Shafir, E., & Tversky, A. (1992). Thinking through uncertainty: Non- 
consequential reasoning and choice. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 449- 
474. 
Siegel, S. (1956). Nonparametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice. Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 59, 99-118. 
Simon, H. A. 0956). Rational choice and the structure of the environment. 
Psychological Review, 63, 129-138. 
Swarm, W. B., & Pittman, T. S. (1977). Initiating play activity of children: 
The moderating influence of verbal cues on intrinsic motivation. Child 
Development, 48, 1128-1132. 
Taylor, S. E. (1989). Positive illusions: Creative self-deception and the 
healthy mind. New York: Basic Books. 
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social- 


