Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect 
and the Coase Theorem 
Daniel Kahneman 
University of California, Berkeley 
Jack L. Knetsch 
Simon Fraser University 
Richard H. Thaler 
Cornell University 
Contrary to theoretical expectations, measures of willingness to ac- 
cept greatly exceed measures of willingness to pay. This paper re- 
ports several experiments that demonstrate that this "endowment 
effect" persists even in market settings with opportunities to learn. 
Consumption objects (e.g., coffee mugs) are randomly given to half 
the subjects in an experiment. Markets for the mugs are then con- 
ducted. The Coase theorem predicts that about half the mugs will 
trade, but observed volume is always significantly less. When markets 
for "induced-value" tokens are conducted, the predicted volume is 
observed, suggesting that transactions costs cannot explain the 
undertrading for consumption goods. 
I. Introduction 
The standard assumptions of economic theory imply that when in- 
come effects are small, differences between an individual's maximum 
Financial support was provided by Fisheries and Oceans Canada, the Ontario Minis- 
try of the Environment, and the behavioral economics program of the Alfred P. Sloan 
Foundation. We wish to thank Vernon Smith for encouraging us to conduct these 
experiments and for providing extensive comments on earlier drafts. Of course, the 
usual disclaimer applies. 
Journal of Political Economy, 1990, vol. 98, no. 6] 
? 1990 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808/90/9806-0004$01.50 
1325 
1326 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
willingness to pay (WTP) for a good and minimum compensation 
demanded for the same entitlement (willingness to accept [WTA]) 
should be negligible (Willig 1976). Thus indifference curves are 
drawn without reference to current endowments; any difference be- 
tween equivalent and compensating variation assessments of welfare 
changes is in practice ignored;' and there is wide acceptance of the 
Coase theorem assertion that, subject to income effects, the allocation 
of resources will be independent of the assignment of property rights 
when costless trades are possible. 
The assumption that entitlements do not affect value contrasts 
sharply with empirical observations of significantly higher selling than 
buying prices. For example, Thaler (1980) found that the minimal 
compensation demanded for accepting a .001 risk of sudden death 
was higher by one or two orders of magnitude than the amount 
people were willing to pay to eliminate an identical existing risk. 
Other examples of similar reported findings are summarized in table 
1. The disparities observed in these examples are clearly too large to 
be explained plausibly by income effects. 
Several factors probably contribute to the discrepancies between 
the evaluations of buyers and sellers that are documented in table 1. 
The perceived illegitimacy of the transaction may, for example, con- 
tribute to the extraordinarily high demand for personal compensa- 
tion for agreeing to the loss of a public good (e.g., Rowe, d'Arge, and 
Brookshire 1980). Standard bargaining habits may also contribute to 
a discrepancy between the stated reservation prices of buyers and 
sellers. Sellers are often rewarded for overstating their true value, 
and buyers for understating theirs (Knez, Smith, and Williams 1985). 
By force of habit they may misrepresent their true valuations even 
when such misrepresentation confers no advantage, as in answering 
hypothetical questions or one-shot or single transactions. In such situ- 
ations the buying-selling discrepancy is simply a strategic mistake, 
which experienced traders will learn to avoid (Coursey, Hovis, and 
Schulze 1987; Brookshire and Coursey 1987). 
The hypothesis of interest here is that many discrepancies between 
WTA and WTP, far from being a mistake, reflect a genuine effect 
of reference positions on preferences. Thaler (1980) labeled the in- 
creased value of a good to an individual when the good becomes part 
of the individual's endowment the "endowment effect." This effect is 
a manifestation of "loss aversion," the generalization that losses are 
weighted substantially more than objectively commensurate gains in 
' For example, the conventional prescription for assessing environmental and other 
losses is that, "practically speaking, it does not appear to make much difference which 
definition is accepted" (Freeman 1979, p. 3). 
t- - - 
Mo cli cli cl clis . Z~~~~~~ 
H Y t Nte~css tsn 
4 z 00 C4 00 0 t i o o 
? H 4 a N 6 
0~~~~~~~~~~~~0 
00 Ln C04 
;|l H r> K --'t- - 04 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~I o14 -4 
04 
. 
W W ct 4 - 
M 
(I)~~~~~~~~~~~~I 
0 bO b~~~~c 00 u r 
*0 0 r 
0 ( _014 ' 
v o ~~~00v 
e ?O- < .04 
: S ct - 0 _ Cz CIZV~" 
vC)0 . 
4 NO. r. 
H V~~~~~~~~Z V & O - C 
1328 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
the evaluation of prospects and trades (Kahneman and Tversky 1979; 
Tversky and Kahneman, in press). An implication of this asymmetry 
is that if a good is evaluated as a loss when it is given up and as a gain 
when it is acquired, loss aversion will, on average, induce a higher 
dollar value for owners than for potential buyers, reducing the set of 
mutually acceptable trades. 
There are some cases in which no endowment effect would be 
expected, such as when goods are purchased for resale rather than 
for utilization. A particularly clear case of a good held exclusively for 
resale is the notional token typically traded in experimental markets 
commonly used to test the efficiency of market institutions (Plott 
1982; Smith 1982). Such experiments employ the induced-value tech- 
nique in which the objects of trade are tokens to which private re- 
demption values that vary among individual participants have been 
assigned by the experimenter (Smith 1976). Subjects can obtain the 
prescribed value assigned for the tokens when redeeming them at the 
end of the trading period; the tokens are otherwise worthless. 
No endowment effect would be expected for such tokens, which are 
valued only because they can be redeemed for cash. Thus both buyers 
and sellers should value tokens at the induced value they have been 
assigned. Markets for induced-value tokens can therefore be used as 
a control condition to determine whether differences between the 
values of buyers and sellers in other markets could be attributable to 
transaction costs, misunderstandings, or habitual strategies of bar- 
gaining. Any discrepancy between the buying and selling values can 
be isolated in an experiment by comparing the outcomes of markets 
for real goods with those of otherwise identical markets for induced- 
value tokens. If no differences in values are observed for the induced- 
value tokens, then economic theory predicts that no differences be- 
tween buying and selling values will be observed for consumption 
goods evaluated and traded under the same conditions. 
The results from a series of experiments involving real exchanges 
of tokens and of various consumption goods are reported in this 
paper. In each case, a random allocation design was used to test for 
the presence of an endowment effect. Half of the subjects were en- 
dowed with a good and became potential sellers in each market; the 
other half of the subjects were potential buyers. Conventional eco- 
nomic analysis yields the simple prediction that one-half of the goods 
should be traded in voluntary exchanges. If value is unaffected by 
ownership, then the distribution of values in the two groups should be 
the same except for sampling variation. The supply and demand 
curves should therefore be mirror images of each other, intersecting 
at their common median. The null hypothesis is, therefore, that half 
of the goods provided should change hands. Label this predicted 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1329 
volume V*. If there is an endowment effect, the value of the good will 
be higher for sellers than for buyers, and observed volume V will be 
less than V*. The ratio V/V* provides a unit-free measure of the 
undertrading that is produced by the effect of ownership on value. 
To test the hypothesis that market experience eliminates undertrad- 
ing, the markets were repeated several times. 
A test for the possibility that observed undertrading was due to 
transaction costs was provided by a comparison of the results from a 
series of induced-value markets with those from the subsequent 
goods markets carried out with identical trading rules. Notice that this 
comparison can also be used to eliminate numerous other possible 
explanations of the observed undertrading. For example, if the in- 
structions to the subjects are confusing or misleading, the effects 
should show up in both the induced-value markets and the experi- 
mental markets for real goods. Section II describes studies of trading 
volume in induced-value markets and in consumption goods markets. 
Section III provides a further test for strategic behavior and demon- 
strates that the disparity findings are not likely caused by this. Section 
IV investigates the extent to which the undertrading of goods is pro- 
duced by reluctance to buy and reluctance to sell. Section V examines 
undertrading in bilateral negotiations and provides a test of the Coase 
theorem. Section VI describes an experiment that rules out income 
effects and a trophy effect as explanations of the observed valuation 
disparity. Implications of the observed effects are discussed in Section 
VII. 
II. Repeated Market Experiments 
In experiment 1, 44 students in an advanced undergraduate law and 
economics class at Cornell University received a packet of general 
instructions plus 11 forms, one for each of the markets that were 
conducted in the experiment. (The instructions for all experiments 
are available from the authors.) The first three markets were con- 
ducted for induced-value tokens. Sellers received the following in- 
structions (with differences for buyers in brackets): 
In this market the objects being traded are tokens. You are 
an owner, so you now own a token [You are a buyer, so you 
have an opportunity to buy a token] which has a value to you 
of $x. It has this value to you because the experimenter will 
give you this much money for it. The value of the token is 
different for different individuals. A price for the tokens will 
be determined later. For each of the prices listed below, 
please indicate whether you prefer to: (1) Sell your token at 
1330 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
this price and receive the market price. [Buy a token at this 
price and cash it in for the sum of money indicated above.] 
(2) Keep your token and cash it in for the sum of money 
indicated above. [Not buy a token at this price.] For each 
price indicate your decision by marking an X in the appro- 
priate column. 
Part of the response form for sellers follows: 
At a price of $8.75 I will sell I will not sell 
At a price of $8.25 I will sell I will not sell 
The same rectangular distribution of values-ranging from $0.25 
to $8.75 in steps of $0.50-was prepared for both buyers and sellers. 
Because not all the forms were actually distributed, however, the 
induced supply and demand curves were not always precisely sym- 
metrical. Subjects alternated between the buyer and seller role in the 
three successive markets and were assigned a different individual 
redemption value in each trial. 
Experimenters collected the forms from all participants after each 
market period and immediately calculated and announced the mar- 
ket-clearing price,2 the number of trades, and the presence or absence 
of excess demand or supply at the market-clearing price.3 Three 
buyers and three sellers were selected at random after each of the 
induced markets and were paid off according to the preferences 
stated on their forms and the market-clearing price for that period. 
Immediately after the three induced-value markets, subjects on al- 
ternating seats were given Cornell coffee mugs, which sell for $6.00 
each at the bookstore. The experimenter asked all participants to 
examine a mug, either their own or their neighbor's. The experi- 
menter then informed the subjects that four markets for mugs would 
be conducted using the same procedures as the prior induced mar- 
kets with two exceptions: (1) One of the four market trials would 
subsequently be selected at random, and only the trades made on this 
2 The instructions stated that "it is in your best interest to answer these questions truthfully. 
For any question, treat the price as fixed. (In economics jargon, you should act as 'price 
takers'.)" All the subjects were junior and senior economics majors, so they were famil- 
iar with the terms used. If subjects asked how the market prices were determined, they 
were told, truthfully, that the market price was the point at which the elicited supply 
and demand curves intersected. The uniformity of the results across many different 
experiments suggests that this information had no discernible effect on behavior. Fur- 
thermore, the responses of the subjects in the induced-value portion of the experi- 
ments indicate that nearly all understood and accepted their role as price takers. See 
also experiment 5, in which a random price procedure was used. 
3 When this occurred, a random draw determined which buyers and sellers were 
accommodated. 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1331 
trial would be executed. (2) In the binding market trial, all trades 
would be implemented, unlike the subset implemented in the 
induced-value markets.4 The initial assignment of buyer and seller 
roles was maintained for all four trading periods. The clearing price 
and the number of trades were announced after each period. The 
market that "counted" was indicated after the fourth period, and 
transactions were executed immediately. All sellers who had indicated 
that they would give up their mugs for a sum at the market-clearing 
price exchanged their mugs for cash, and successful buyers paid this 
same price and received their mugs. This design was used to permit 
learning to take place over successive trials and yet make each trial 
potentially binding. The same procedure was then followed for four 
more successive markets using boxed ballpoint pens with a visible 
bookstore price tag of $3.98, which were distributed to the subjects 
who had been buyers in the mug markets. 
For each goods market, subjects completed a form similar to that 
used for the induced-value tokens, with the following instructions: 
You now own the object in your possession. [You do not 
own the object that you see in the possession of some of your 
neighbors.] You have the option of selling it [buying one] if a 
price, which will be determined later, is acceptable to you. 
For each of the possible prices below indicate whether you 
wish to: (1) Sell your object and receive this price [Pay this 
price and receive an object to take home with you] or (2) 
Keep your object and take it home with you. [Not buy an 
object at this price.] For each price indicate your decision by 
marking an X in the appropriate column. 
The buyers and sellers in the consumption goods markets faced the 
same incentives that they had experienced in the induced-value mar- 
kets. Buyers maximized their potential gain by agreeing to buy at all 
prices below the value they ascribed to the good, and sellers max- 
imized their welfare by agreeing to sell at all prices above the good's 
worth to them. As in the induced-value markets, it was in the best 
interest of the participants to act as price takers. 
As shown in table 2, the markets for induced-value tokens and 
consumption goods yielded sharply different results. In the induced- 
value markets, as expected, the median buying and selling prices were 
identical. The ratio of actual to predicted volume (V/V*) was 1.0, 
4 The experimental design was intended to give the markets for consumption goods 
every possible chance to be efficient. While in the induced-value markets not everyone 
was paid, in the consumption goods markets everyone was paid. Also, the consumption 
goods markets were conducted after the induced-value markets and were repeated 
four times each, to allow the subjects the maximum opportunity for learning. 
1332 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
TABLE 2 
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 1 
INDUCED-VALUE MARKETS 
Actual Expected 
Trial Trades Trades Price Expected Price 
1 12 11 3.75 3.75 
2 11 11 4.75 4.75 
3 10 11 4.25 4.25 
CONSUMPTION GOODS MARKETS 
Median Buyer Median Seller 
Trial Trades Price Reservation Price Reservation Price 
Mugs (Expected Trades = 11) 
4 4 4.25 2.75 5.25 
5 1 4.75 2.25 5.25 
6 2 4.50 2.25 5.25 
7 2 4.25 2.25 5.25 
Pens (Expected Trades = 11) 
8 4 1.25 .75 2.50 
9 5 1.25 .75 1.75 
10 4 1.25 .75 2.25 
11 5 1.25 .75 1.75 
aggregating over the three periods. In contrast, the median selling 
prices in the mug and pen markets were more than twice the median 
buying prices, and the V/V* ratio was only .20 for mugs and .41 for 
pens. Observed volume did not increase over successive periods in 
either the mug or the pen markets, providing no indication that sub- 
jects learned to adopt equal buying and selling prices. 
The results of the first and last markets for coffee mugs are also 
displayed in figure 1. There are five features to notice in this figure: 
(1) Both buyers and sellers display a wide range of values, indicating 
that in the absence of an endowment effect there would be enough 
rents to produce gains from trade. Indeed, the range of values is 
similar to that used in the induced-value markets, which had near- 
perfect market efficiency. (2) The distribution of selling prices has a 
single mode, unlike some recent results in which an evaluation dis- 
crepancy could be explained by a bimodal distribution of compensa- 
tion demanded (Boyce et al. 1990). (3) The payment of a small com- 
mission for trading, such as $0.25 per trade, would not significantly 
alter the results. (4) The mugs were desirable. Every subject assigned 
a positive value to the mug, and the lowest value assigned by a seller 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1 3'3 3 
9 
8 8- ~~~~Supply 4 
7 
6 
0 o~~~ 5 8 -{Supply 1 
2 ]72 Demad 1 3 1 
2 
1 ~Demand 4 1 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 
Quantity 
FIG. 1.-Supply and demand curves, markets 1 and 4 
was $2.25. (5) Neither demand nor supply changed much between 
the first and last markets. 
Experiment 2 was conducted in an undergraduate microeconomics 
class at Cornell (N = 38). The procedure was identical to that of 
experiment 1, except that the second consumption good was a pair of 
folding binoculars in a cardboard frame, available at the bookstore 
for $4.00. The results are reported in table 3. 
In experiments 3 and 4, conducted in Simon Fraser University 
undergraduate economics classes, the subjects were asked to provide 
minimum selling prices or maximum buying prices rather than to 
answer the series of yes or no questions used in experiments 1 and 2. 
The induced-value markets were conducted with no monetary pay- 
offs and were followed by four markets for pens in experiment 3 and 
five markets for mugs in experiment 4. In experiment 3, subjects 
were told that the first three markets for pens would be used for 
practice, so only the fourth and final market would be binding. In 
experiment 4, one of the five markets was selected at random to 
count, as in experiments 1 and 2. Other procedures were unchanged. 
The results are shown in table 4. 
Experiments 2-4 all yielded results similar to those obtained in 
experiment 1. Summing over the induced-value markets in all four 
experiments produced a V/V* index of .91. This excellent perfor- 
mance was achieved even though the participants did not have the 
1334 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
TABLE 3 
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 2 
INDUCED-VALUE MARKETS 
Actual Expected 
Trial Trades Trades Price Expected Price 
1 10 10 3.75 4.25 
2 9 10 4.75 4.25 
3 7 8 4.25 4.75 
CONSUMPTION GOODS MARKETS 
Median Buyer Median Seller 
Trial Trades Price Reservation Price Reservation Price 
Mugs (Expected Trades = 9.5) 
4 3 3.75 1.75 4.75 
5 3 3.25 2.25 4.75 
6 2 3.25 2.25 4.75 
7 2 3.25 2.25 4.25 
Binoculars (Expected Trades = 9.5) 
8 4 1.25 .75 1.25 
9 4 .75 .75 1.25 
10 3 .75 .75 1.75 
11 3 .75 .75 1.75 
benefit of experience with the trading rules, there were limited mone- 
tary incentives in experiments 1 and 2, and there were no monetary 
incentives in experiments 3 and 4. In the markets for consumption 
goods, in which all participants faced monetary incentives and ex- 
perience with the market rules gained from the induced-value mar- 
kets, V/V* averaged .31, and median selling prices were more than 
double the corresponding buying prices. Trading procedures were 
precisely identical in markets for goods and for induced-value tokens. 
The high volume of trade in money tokens therefore eliminates trans- 
action costs (or any other feature that was present in both types of 
markets) as an explanation of the observed undertrading of con- 
sumption goods. 
It should be noted that subjects in the position of buyers were not 
given money to use for purchases, but rather had to make transac- 
tions using their own money. (Subjects were told to bring money to 
class and that credit and change would be available if necessary. Some 
subjects borrowed from friends to make payments.) The aim was to 
study transactions in a realistic setting. While the present design 
makes potential sellers slightly wealthier, at least in the first market, 
the magnitude of the possible income effect is trivial. In one of the 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1335 
TABLE 4 
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENTS 3 AND 4 
Actual Expected Ratio of Seller Median Value 
Trial N Object Trades Trades to Buyer Median Value 
Experiment 3 
1 26 Induced 5 6.5 
2 26 Pen 2 6.5 6.0 
3 26 Pen 2 6.5 6.0 
4 26 Pen 2 6.5 5.0 
5 26 Pen 1 6.5 5.0 
Experiment 4 
1 74 Induced 15 18.5 
2 74 Induced 16 18.5 
3 74 Mug 6 18.5 3.8 
4 74 Mug 4 18.5 2.8 
5 72 Mug 4 18 2.2 
6 73 Mug 8 18 1.8 
7 74 Mug 8 18.5 1.8 
markets the equilibrium price was only $0.75, and the prices in other 
markets were never above a few dollars. Also, as shown in experi- 
ments 7 and 8 below, equal undertrading was found in designs that 
eliminated the possibility of an income effect or cash constraint. 
As shown in tables 2-4, subjects showed almost no undertrading 
even in their first trial in an induced-value market. Evidently neither 
bargaining habits nor any transaction costs impede trading in money 
tokens. On the other hand, there is no indication that participants in 
the markets for goods learned to make valuations independent of 
their entitlements. The discrepant evaluations of buyers and sellers 
remained stable over four, and in one case five, successive markets for 
the same good and did not change systematically over repeated mar- 
kets for successive goods. 
A difference in procedure probably explains the apparent conflict 
between these results and the conclusion reached in some other stud- 
ies, that the WTA-WTP discrepancy is greatly reduced by market 
experience. The studies that reported a disciplinary effect of market 
experience assessed this effect by comparing the responses of buyers 
and sellers in preliminary hypothetical questions or nonbinding mar- 
ket trials to their behavior in a subsequent binding trial with real 
monetary payoffs (Knez et al. 1985; Brookshire and Coursey 1987; 
Coursey et al. 1987). In the present experiments, the markets for 
consumption goods were real and potentially binding from the first 
trial, and the WTA-WTP discrepancy was found to be stable over a 
series of such binding trials. 
1336 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
It should be stressed that previous research did not actually demon- 
strate that the discrepancy between buyers and sellers is eliminated in 
markets. Although the discrepancy between the final selling and buy- 
ing prices in the sucrose octa-acetate experiment of Coursey et al. 
(1987) was not statistically significant, the ratio of median prices of 
sellers and buyers was still 2.6.5 If the buyers and sellers had been 
allowed to trade according to their final bids, a total of nine advanta- 
geous exchanges would have occurred between the two groups, com- 
pared to the theoretical expectation of 16 trades (for details, see 
Knetsch and Sinden [1987]). This V/V* ratio of .56 is quite similar to 
the ratios observed in experiments 1-4. In the study by Brookshire 
and Coursey (1987), the ratio of mean prices was indeed reduced by 
experience, from a high of 77 for initial hypothetical survey responses 
to 6.1 in the first potentially binding auction conducted in a labora- 
tory. However, the ratio remained at 5.6 in the final auction. 
III. Testing for Misrepresentation 
As previously stated, subjects faced identical incentives in the in- 
duced-value and consumption goods phases of experiments 1-4. 
Therefore, it seems safe to attribute the difference in observed trad- 
ing to the endowment effect. However, some readers of early drafts 
of this paper have suggested that because of the way market prices 
were determined, subjects might have felt that they had an incentive 
to misstate their true values in order to influence the price, and per- 
haps this incentive was perceived to be greater in the consumption 
goods markets. To eliminate this possible interpretation of the previ- 
ous results, experiment 5 was carried out in a manner similar to the 
first four experiments, except that subjects were told that the price 
would be selected at random. As is well known, this is an incentive- 
compatible procedure for eliciting values (see Becker, DeGroot, and 
Marschak 1964). 
Each participant received the following instructions (with appropri- 
ate alternative wording in the buyers' forms): 
After you have finished, one of the prices listed below will 
be selected at random and any exchanges will take place at 
that price. If you have indicated you will sell at this price you 
will receive this amount of money and will give up the mug; 
if you have indicated that you will keep the mug at this price 
5 The ratio of the mean selling and buying prices is 1.4 if all subjects are included. 
However, if one buyer and one seller with extreme valuations are excluded, the ratio is 
1.9. These numbers were reported in an earlier version of Coursey et al. (1987). 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1337 
then no exchange will be made and you can take the mug 
home with you. 
... Your decision can have no effect on the price actually 
used because the price will be selected at random. 
The experiment was conducted in a series of six tutorial groups of a 
business statistics class at Simon Fraser University. The use of small 
groups helped assure complete understanding of the instructions, 
and the exercises were conducted over the course of a single day 
to minimize opportunities for communication between participants. 
Each group was divided equally: half of the subjects were designated 
as sellers by random selection, and the other half became buyers. A 
total of 59 people took part. 
Two induced-value markets for hypothetical payoffs and a subse- 
quent third real exchange market for money and mugs were con- 
ducted with identical trading rules used in all three. All participants 
maintained the same role as either buyers or sellers for the three 
markets. As in experiments 1 and 2, the prices that individuals chose 
to buy or to sell were selected from possible prices ranging from $0.00 
to $9.50 listed by increments of $0.50. 
The results of this experiment were nearly identical to the earlier 
ones in which the actual exchanges were based on the market-clearing 
price. Even though possibly less motivating hypothetical values were 
used in the two induced-value markets, nearly all participants pur- 
sued a profit-maximizing selection of prices to buy or sell the assets. 
Fourteen exchanges at a price of $4.75 were expected in the first 
induced-value market on the basis of the randomly distributed values 
written on the forms. Thirteen trades at this price were indicated 
by the prices actually selected by the participants. The results of the 
second hypothetical induced-value market were equally convincing, 
with 16 of the 17 expected exchanges made at the expected price of 
$5.75. The procedures and incentives were apparently well under- 
stood by the participants. 
Mugs, comparable to those used in other experiments, were distrib- 
uted to the potential sellers after the induced-value markets were 
completed. A mug was also shown to all the potential buyers. The 
following form with instructions, nearly identical to the ones used in 
the induced-value markets, was then distributed (with the alternative 
wording for buyers in brackets): 
You now [do not] have, and own a mug which you can 
keep and take home. You also have the option of selling it 
and receiving [buying one to take home by paying] money 
for it. 
For each of the possible prices listed below, please indicate 
1338 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
whether you wish to: (1) Receive [pay] that amount of money 
and sell your [buy a] mug, or (2) Not sell your [buy a] mug at 
this price. 
After you have finished, one of the prices listed below will 
be selected at random and any exchanges will take place at 
that price. If you have indicated you will sell [buy] at this 
price you will receive this amount of money [a mug] and will 
give up the mug [pay this amount of money]; if you have 
indicated that you will keep the [not buy a] mug at this price 
then no exchange will be made and you can take the mug 
home with you [do not pay anything]. 
Notice the following two things: (1) Your decision can 
have no effect on the price actually used because the price 
will be selected at random. (2) It is in your interest to indicate 
your true preferences at each of the possible prices listed 
below. 
For each price indicate your decision by marking an X in 
the appropriate column. 
I Will Sell I Will Keep 
[Buy] [Not Buy] the Mug 
If the price is $0 
If the price is $0.50 
If the price is $9.50 
After the instructions were read and reviewed by the experimenter 
and questions were answered, participants completed the forms indi- 
cating either their lowest selling price or their highest buying price. A 
random price, from among the list from $0.00 to $9.50, was then 
drawn, and exchanges based on this price were completed. 
The results again showed a large and significant endowment effect. 
Given the 29 potential buyers, 30 potential sellers, and the random 
distribution of the mugs, 14.5 exchanges would be expected if entitle- 
ments did not influence valuations. Instead, only six were indicated 
on the basis of the values actually selected by the potential buyers and 
sellers (V/V* = .41). The median selling price of $5.75 was over twice 
the median buying price of $2.25, and the means were $5.78 and 
$2.21, respectively. 
IV. Reluctance to Buy versus Reluctance to Sell 
Exchanges of money and a good (or between two goods) offer the 
possibilities of four comparisons: a choice of gaining either the good 
or money, a choice of losing one or the other, buying (giving up 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1339 
money for the good), and selling (giving up the good for money) 
(Tversky and Kahneman, in press). The endowment effect results 
from a difference between the relative preferences for the good and 
money. The comparison of buying and selling to simple choices be- 
tween gains permits an analysis of the discrepancy between WTA and 
WTP into two components: reluctance to sell (exchanging the good 
for money) and reluctance to buy (exchanging money for the good). 
Experiments 6 and 7 were carried out to assess the weight of reluc- 
tance to buy and reluctance to sell in undertrading of a good similar 
to the goods used in the earlier experiments. The subjects in experi- 
ment 6 were 77 Simon Fraser students, randomly assigned to three 
groups. Members of one group, designated sellers, were given a cof- 
fee mug and were asked to indicate whether or not they would sell the 
mug at a series of prices ranging from $0.00 to $9.25. A group of 
buyers indicated whether they were willing to buy a mug at each of 
these prices. Finally, choosers were asked to choose, for each of the 
possible prices, between a mug and cash. 
The results again reveal substantial undertrading: While 12.5 
trades were expected between buyers and sellers, only three trades 
took place (V/V* = .24). The median valuations were $7.12 for 
sellers, $3.12 for choosers, and $2.87 for buyers. The close similarity 
of results for buyers and choosers indicates that there was relatively 
little reluctance to pay for the mug. 
Experiment 7 was carried out with 117 students at the University of 
British Columbia. It used an identical design except that price tags 
were left on the mugs. The results were consistent with those in ex- 
periment 6. Nineteen trades were expected on the basis of valuation 
equivalence, but only one was concluded on the basis of actual valua- 
tions (V/V* = .05). The median valuations were $7.00 for sellers, 
$3.50 for choosers, and $2.00 for buyers. 
It is worth noting that these results eliminate any form of income 
effect as an explanation of the discrepant valuations since the posi- 
tions of sellers and choosers were strictly identical. The allocation of a 
particular mug to each seller evidently induced a sense of endowment 
that the choosers did not share: the median value of the mug to the 
sellers was more than double the value indicated by the choosers even 
though their choices were objectively the same. The results imply that 
the observed undertrading of consumption goods may be largely due 
to a reluctance to part with entitlements. 
V. Bilateral Bargaining and the Coase Theorem 
According to the Coase theorem, the allocation of resources to indi- 
viduals who can bargain and transact at no cost should be indepen- 
1340 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
dent of initial property rights. However, if the marginal rate of sub- 
stitution between one good and another is affected by endowment, 
then the individual who is assigned the property right to a good will 
be more likely to retain it. A bilateral bargaining experiment (experi- 
ment 8) was carried out to test this implication of the endowment 
effect. 
The subjects were 35 pairs of students in seven small tutorials at 
Simon Fraser University. The students were enrolled in either a be- 
ginning economics course or an English class. Each student was ran- 
domly paired with another student in the same tutorial group, with 
care taken to assure that students entering the tutorial together were 
not assigned as a pair. A game of Nim, a simple game easily ex- 
plained, was played by each pair of participants. The winners of the 
game were each given a 400-gram Swiss chocolate bar and told it was 
theirs to keep. 
An induced-value bargaining session was then conducted. The 
member of each pair who did not win the Nim game, and therefore 
did not receive the chocolate bar, was given a ticket and an instruction 
sheet that indicated that the ticket was worth $3.00 because it could be 
redeemed for that sum. The ticket owners were also told that they 
could sell the ticket to their partner if mutually agreeable terms could 
be reached. The partners (the chocolate bar owners) received instruc- 
tions indicating that they could receive $5.00 for the ticket if they 
could successfully buy it from the owner. Thus there was a $2.00 
surplus available to any pair completing a trade. 
The pairs were then given an unlimited amount of time to bargain. 
Subjects were told that both credit and change were available from 
the experimenter. Results of the bargaining sessions were recorded 
on their instruction sheets. 
Of the 35 pairs of participants, 29 agreed to an exchange (V/V* - 
.83). The average price paid for the 29 tickets was $4.09, with 12 of 
the exchange prices being exactly $4.00. Payments of the redemption 
values of the tickets were made as soon as the exchanges were com- 
pleted. These payments were made in single dollar bills to facilitate 
trading in the subsequent bargaining session. After the ticket ex- 
changes were completed, owners of the chocolate bars were told that 
they could sell them to their partners if a mutually agreeable price 
could be determined. The procedures used for the tickets were once 
again applied to these bargaining sessions. 
An important effect of the preliminary induced-value ticket bar- 
gains was to provide the ticket owners with some cash. The average 
gain to the ticket owners (including the six who did not sell their 
tickets) was $3.90. The average gain to their partners (the chocolate 
bar owners) was only $0.76. Thus the potential chocolate bar buyers 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1341 
were endowed with an average of $3.14 more than the owners, creat- 
ing a small income effect toward the buyers. Also, to the extent that a 
windfall gain such as this is spent more casually by subjects than other 
money (for evidence on such a "house money effect," see Thaler and 
Johnson [1990]), trading of chocolate bars should be facilitated. 
Results of the chocolate bar bargains once again suggest reluctance 
to trade. Rather than the 17.5 trades expected from the random 
allocations, only seven were observed (V/V* = .4). The average price 
paid in those exchanges that did occur was $2.69 (the actual prices 
were $6.00, $3.10, $3.00, $2.75, $2.00, $1.00, and $1.00). If the six 
pairs of subjects who did not successfully complete bargains in the 
first stage are omitted from the sample on the grounds that they did 
not understand the task or procedures, then six trades are observed 
where 14.5 would be expected (V/V* = .414). Similarly, if two more 
pairs are dropped because the prices at which they exchanged tickets 
were outside the range $3.00-$5.00, then the number of trades falls 
to four, and V/V* falls to .296. (No significant differences between the 
students in the English and economics classes were observed.)6 
To be sure that the chocolate bars were valued by the subjects and 
that these valuations would vary enough to yield mutually beneficial 
trades, the same chocolate bars were distributed to half the members 
of another class at Simon Fraser. Those who received chocolate bars 
were asked the minimum price they would accept to sell their bar, 
while those without the bars were asked the maximum price they 
would pay to acquire a bar. The valuations of the bars varied from 
$0.50 to $8.00. The average value ascribed by sellers was $3.98, while 
the buyers' average valuation was $1.25. (The median values were 
$3.50 and $1.25.) 
VI. The Endowment Effect in Choices between 
Goods 
The previous experiments documented undertrading in exchanges 
of money and consumption goods. A separate experiment (Knetsch 
1989) establishes the same effect in exchanges between two goods. 
Participants in three classes were offered a choice between the same 
two goods. All students in one class were given a coffee mug at the 
6 We conducted two similar bargaining experiments that yielded comparable results. 
Twenty-six pairs of subjects negotiated the sale of mugs and then envelopes containing 
an uncertain amount of money. Buyers had not been given any cash endowment. 
These sessions yielded six and five trades, respectively, where 13 would be expected. 
Also, some induced-value bilateral negotiation sessions were conducted in which only 
$0.50 of surplus was available (the seller's valuation was $1.50 and the buyer's was 
$2.00). Nevertheless, 21 of a possible 26 trades were completed. 
1342 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
beginning of the session as compensation for completing a short ques- 
tionnaire. At the completion of the task, the experimenters showed 
the students a bar of Swiss chocolate that they could immediately 
receive in exchange for the mug. The students in another class were 
offered an opportunity to make the opposite exchange after first 
being given the chocolate bar. The students in a third class were sim- 
ply offered a choice, at the beginning of the session, between a choco- 
late bar and a mug. The proportion of students selecting the mug was 
89 percent in the class originally endowed with mugs (N = 76), 56 
percent in the class offered a choice (N = 55), and only 10 percent in 
the class originally endowed with chocolate bars (N = 87). For most 
participants a mug was more valuable than the chocolate when the 
mug had to be given up but less valuable when the chocolate had to be 
given up. This experiment confirms that undertrading can occur 
even when income effects are ruled out. It also demonstrates an en- 
dowment effect for a good that was distributed to everyone in the 
class and therefore did not have the appeal of a prize or trophy. 
VII. Discussion 
The evidence presented in this paper supports what may be called an 
instant endowment effect: the value that an individual assigns to such 
objects as mugs, pens, binoculars, and chocolate bars appears to in- 
crease substantially as soon as that individual is given the object.7 The 
apparently instantaneous nature of the reference point shift and con- 
sequent value change induced by giving a person possession of a good 
goes beyond previous discussions of the endowment effect, which 
focused on goods that have been in the individual's possession for 
some time. While long-term endowment effects could be explained by 
sentimental attachment or by an improved technology of consump- 
tion in the Stigler-Becker (1977) sense, the differences in preference 
or taste demonstrated by more than 700 participants in the experi- 
ments reported in this paper cannot be explained in this fashion. 
The endowment effect is one explanation for the systematic differ- 
ences between buying and selling prices that have been observed so 
often in past work. One of the objectives of this study was to examine 
an alternative explanation for this buying-selling discrepancy, namely 
that it reflects a general bargaining strategy (Knez and Smith 1987) 
that would be eliminated by experience in the market (Brookshire 
7 The impression gained from informal pilot experiments is that the act of giving the 
participant physical possession of the good results in a more consistent endowment 
effect. Assigning subjects a chance to receive a good, or a property right to a good to be 
received at a later time, seemed to produce weaker effects. 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1343 
and Coursey 1987; Coursey et al. 1987). Our results do not support 
this alternative view. The trading institution used in experiments 1-7 
encouraged participants to be price takers (especially in experiment 
5), and the rules provided no incentive to conceal true preferences. 
Furthermore, the results of the induced-value markets indicate that 
the subjects understood the demand-revealing nature of the ques- 
tions they were asked and acted accordingly. Substantial undertrad- 
ing was nevertheless observed in markets for consumption goods. As 
for learning and market discipline, there was no indication that buy- 
ing and selling prices converged over repeated market trials, though 
full feedback was provided at the end of each trial. The undertrading 
observed in these experiments appears to reflect a true difference in 
preferences between the potential buyers and sellers. The robustness 
of this result reduces the risk that the outcome is produced by an 
experimental artifact. In short, the present findings indicate that the 
endowment effect can persist in genuine market settings. 
The contrast between the induced-value markets and the consump- 
tion goods markets lends support to Heiner's (1985) conjecture that 
the results of induced-value experiments may not generalize to all 
market settings. The defining characteristic of the induced-value 
markets is that the values of the tokens are unequivocally defined by 
the amount the experimenter will pay for them. Loss aversion is irrel- 
evant with such objects because transactions are evaluated simply on 
the basis of net gain or loss. (If someone is offered $6.00 for a $5.00 
bill, there is no sense of loss associated with the trade.) Some markets 
may share this feature of induced-value markets, especially when the 
conditions of pure arbitrage are approached. However, the computa- 
tion of net gain and loss is not possible in other situations, for ex- 
ample, in markets in which risky prospects are traded for cash or in 
markets in which people sell goods that they also value for their use. 
In these conditions, the cancellation of the loss of the object against 
the dollars received is not possible because the good and money are 
not strictly commensurate. The valuation ambiguity produced by this 
lack of commensurability is necessary, although not sufficient, for 
both loss aversion and a buying-selling discrepancy. 
The results of the experimental demonstrations of the endowment 
effect have direct implications for economic theory and economic 
predictions. Contrary to the assumptions of standard economic the- 
ory that preferences are independent of entitlements,8 the evidence 
8 Although ownership can affect taste in the manner suggested by Stigler and Becker 
(1977), in the absence of income effects, it is traditional to assume that the indifference 
curves in an Edgeworth box diagram do not depend on the location of the endowment 
point. 
1344 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
presented here indicates that people's preferences depend on their 
reference positions. Consequently, preference orderings are not de- 
fined independently of endowments: good A may be preferred to B 
when A is part of an original endowment, but the reverse may be true 
when initial reference positions are changed. Indifference curves will 
have a kink at the endowment or reference point (see Tversky and 
Kahneman, in press), and an indifference curve tracing acceptable 
trades in one direction may even cross another indifference curve 
that plots the acceptable exchanges in the opposite direction (Knetsch 
1989). 
The existence of endowment effects reduces the gains from trade. 
In comparison with a world in which preferences are independent of 
endowment, the existence of loss aversion produces an inertia in the 
economy because potential traders are more reluctant to trade than is 
conventionally assumed. This is not to say that Pareto-optimal trades 
will not take place. Rather, there are simply fewer mutually advanta- 
geous exchanges possible, and so the volume of trade is lower than it 
otherwise would be. 
To assess the practical significance of the endowment effect, it is 
important to consider first some necessary conditions for the effect to 
be observed. Experiments 6 and 7 suggest that the endowment effect 
is primarily a problem for sellers; we observed little reluctance to buy 
but much reluctance to sell. Furthermore, not all sellers are afflicted 
by an endowment effect. The effect did not appear in the markets for 
money tokens, and there is no reason in general to expect reluctance 
to resell goods that are held especially for that purpose. An owner will 
not be reluctant to sell an item at a given price if a perfect substitute is 
readily available at a lower price. This reasoning suggests that endow- 
ment effects will almost certainly occur when owners are faced with 
an opportunity to sell an item purchased for use that is not easily 
replaceable. Examples might include tickets to a sold-out event, hunt- 
ing licenses in limited supply (Bishop and Heberlein 1979), works of 
art, or a pleasant view. 
While the conditions necessary for an endowment effect to be ob- 
served may appear to limit its applicability in economic settings, in 
fact these conditions are very often satisfied, and especially so in the 
bargaining contexts to which the Coase theorem is applied. For ex- 
ample, tickets to Wimbledon are allocated by means of a lottery. A 
standard Coasean analysis would imply that in the presence of an 
efficient ticket brokerage market, winners of the lottery would be no 
more likely to attend the matches than other tennis fans who had won 
a similar cash prize in an unrelated lottery. In contrast, the experi- 
mental results presented in this paper predict that many winners of 
Wimbledon tickets will attend the event, turning down opportunities 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1345 
to sell their tickets that exceed their reservation price for buying 
them. 
Endowment effects can also be observed for firms and other or- 
ganizations. Endowment effects are predicted for property rights ac- 
quired by historic accident or fortuitous circumstances, such as gov- 
ernment licenses, landing rights, or transferable pollution permits. 
Owing to endowment effects, firms will be reluctant to divest them- 
selves of divisions, plants, and product lines even though they would 
never consider buying the same assets; indeed, stock prices often rise 
when firms do give them up. Again, the prediction is not an absence 
of trade, just a reduction in the volume of trade. 
Isolating the influence of endowment effects from those of transac- 
tion costs as causes of low trading volumes is, of course, difficult in 
actual market settings. Demonstrations of endowment effects are 
most persuasive where transaction costs are very small. By design, this 
was the case in the experimental markets, where the efficiency of the 
induced-value markets demonstrated the minimal effect of transac- 
tion costs, or other impediments, on exchange decisions, leaving the 
great reluctance to trade mugs and other goods to be attributable to 
endowment effects. 
Endowment effects are not limited to cases involving physical goods 
or to legal entitlements. The reference position of individuals and 
firms often includes terms of previous transactions or expectations of 
continuation of present, often informal, arrangements. There is clear 
evidence of dramatically asymmetric reactions to improvements and 
deteriorations of these terms and a willingness to make sacrifices to 
avoid unfair treatment (Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1986). The 
reluctance to sell at a loss, owing to a perceived entitlement to a 
formerly prevailing price, can explain two observations of apparent 
undertrading. The first pertains to housing markets. It is often ob- 
served that when housing prices fall, volume also falls. When house 
prices are falling, houses remain on the market longer than when 
prices are rising. Similarly, the volume for stocks that have declined 
in price is lower than the volume for stocks that have increased in 
value (Shefrin and Statman 1985; Ferris, Haugen, and Makhija 
1988), although tax considerations would lead to the opposite predic- 
tion. 
Another manifestation of loss aversion in the context of multiattri- 
bute negotiations is what might be termed "concession aversion": a 
reluctance to accept a loss on any dimension of an agreement. A 
straightforward and common instance of this is the downward stick- 
iness of wages. A somewhat more subtle implication of concession 
aversion is that it can produce inefficient contract terms owing to 
historic precedents. Old firms may have more inefficient arrange- 
1346 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
ments than new ones because new companies can negotiate without 
the reference positions created by prior agreements. Some airlines, 
for example, are required to carry three pilots on some planes while 
others-newer ones-operate with two. 
Loss aversion implies a marked asymmetry in the treatment of 
losses and forgone gains, which plays an essential role in judgments of 
fairness (Kahneman et al. 1986). Accordingly, disputes in which con- 
cessions are viewed as losses are often much less tractable than dis- 
putes in which concessions involve forgone gains. Court decisions 
recognize the asymmetry of losses and forgone gains by favoring 
possessors of goods over other claimants, by limiting recovery of lost 
profits relative to compensation for actual expenditures, and by fail- 
ing to enforce gratuitous promises that are coded as forgone gains to 
the injured party (Cohen and Knetsch 1989). 
To conclude, the evidence reported here offers no support for the 
contention that observations of loss aversion and the consequential 
evaluation disparities are artifacts; nor should they be interpreted as 
mistakes likely to be eliminated by experience, training, or "market 
discipline." Instead, the findings support an alternative view of en- 
dowment effects and loss aversion as fundamental characteristics of 
preferences. 
References 
Banford, Nancy D.; Knetsch, Jack L.; and Mauser, Gary A. "Feasibility 
Judgements and Alternative Measures of Benefits and Costs."J. Bus. Ad- 
min. 11, nos. 1, 2 (1979): 25-35. 
Becker, Gordon M.; DeGroot, Morris H.; and Marschak, Jacob. "Measuring 
Utility by a Single-Response Sequential Method." Behavioral Sci. 9 (July 
1964): 226-32. 
Bishop, Richard C., and Heberlein, Thomas A. "Measuring Values of Ex- 
tramarket Goods: Are Indirect Measures Biased?" American J. Agricultural 
Econ. 61 (December 1979): 926-30. 
Boyce, Rebecca R.; Brown, Thomas C.; McClelland, Gary D.; Peterson, 
George L.; and Schulze, William D. "An Experimental Examination of 
Intrinsic Environmental Values." Working paper. Boulder: Univ. Col- 
orado, 1990. 
Brookshire, David S., and Coursey, Don L. "Measuring the Value of a Public 
Good: An Empirical Comparison of Elicitation Procedures." A.E.R. 77 
(September 1987): 554-66. 
Brookshire, David S.; Randall, Alan; and Stoll, John R. "Valuing Increments 
and Decrements in Natural Resource Service Flows." American J. Agricul- 
tural Econ. 62 (August 1980): 478-88. 
Cohen, David, and Knetsch, Jack L. "Judicial Choice and Disparities between 
Measures of Economic Values." Working paper. Burnaby, B.C.: Simon 
Fraser Univ., 1989. 
Coursey, Don L.; Hovis, John L.; and Schulze, William D. "The Disparity 
ENDOWMENT EFFECT 1347 
between Willingness to Accept and Willingness to Pay Measures of Value." 
Q.J.E. 102 (August 1987): 679-90. 
Ferris, Stephen P.; Haugen, Robert A.; and Makhija, Anil K. "Predicting 
Contemporary Volume with Historic Volume at Differential Price Levels: 
Evidence Supporting the Disposition Effect." J. Finance 43 (July 1988): 
677-97. 
Freeman, A. Myrick. The Benefits of Environmental Improvement. Washington: 
Resources for the Future, 1979. 
Hammack, Judd, and Brown, Gardner Mallard, Jr. Waterfowl and Wetlands: 
Toward Bio-economic Analysis. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press (for Re- 
sources for the Future), 1974. 
Heberlein, Thomas A., and Bishop, Richard C. "Assessing the Validity of 
Contingent Valuation: Three Field Experiments." Paper presented at the 
International Conference on Man's Role in Changing the Global Environ- 
ment, Italy, 1985. 
Heiner, Ronald A. "Experimental Economics: Comment." A.E.R. 75 (March 
1985): 260-63. 
Kahneman, Daniel; Knetsch, Jack L.; and Thaler, Richard. "Fairness as a 
Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market." A.E.R. 76 (Sep- 
tember 1986): 728-41. 
Kahneman, Daniel, and Tversky, Amos. "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of 
Decision under Risk." Econometrica 47 (March 1979): 263-91. 
Knetsch, Jack L. "The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible 
Indifference Curves." A.E.R. 79 (December 1989): 1277-84. 
Knetsch, Jack L., and Sinden, J. A. "Willingness to Pay and Compensation 
Demanded: Experimental Evidence of an Unexpected Disparity in Mea- 
sures of Value." QJ.E. 99 (August 1984): 507-21. 
"The Persistence of Evaluation Disparities." QJ.E. 102 (August 
1987): 691-95. 
Knez, Marc, and Smith, Vernon L. "Hypothetical Valuations and Preference 
Reversals in the Context of Asset Trading." In Laboratory Experiments in 
Economics: Six Points of View, edited by Alvin E. Roth. Cambridge: Cam- 
bridge Univ. Press, 1987. 
Knez, Peter; Smith, Vernon L.; and Williams, Arlington W. "Individual Ra- 
tionality, Market Rationality, and Value Estimation." A.E.R. Papers and 
Proc. 75 (May 1985): 397-402. 
Plott, Charles R. "Industrial Organization Theory and Experimental Eco- 
nomics."J. Econ. Literature 20 (December 1982): 1485-1527. 
Rowe, Robert D.; d'Arge, Ralph C.; and Brookshire, David S. "An Experi- 
ment on the Economic Value of Visibility." J. Environmental Econ. and Man- 
agement 7 (March 1980): 1-19. 
Shefrin, Hersh, and Statman, Meir. "The Disposition to Sell Winners Too 
Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence." J. Finance 40 
(July 1985): 777-90. 
Sinclair, William F. The Economic and Social Impact of Kemano II Hydroelectric 
Project on British Columbia's Fisheries Resources. Vancouver: Dept. Fisheries 
and Oceans, 1978. 
Smith, Vernon L. "Experimental Economics: Induced Value Theory." A.E.R. 
Papers and Proc. 66 (May 1976): 274-79. 
. "Macroeconomic Systems as an Experimental Science." A.E.R. 72 
(December 1982): 923-55. 
Stigler, George J., and Becker, Gary S. "De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum." 
A.E.R. 67 (March 1977): 76-90. 
1348 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
Thaler, Richard. "Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice." J. Econ. 
Behavior and Organization 1 (March 1980): 39-60. 
Thaler, Richard, and Johnson, Eric J. "Gambling with the House Money and 
Trying to Break Even: The Effects of Prior Outcomes on Risky Choice." 
Management Sci. 36 (June 1990). 
Tversky, Amos, and Kahneman, Daniel. "Reference Theory of Choice and 
Exchange." QJ.E. (in press). 
Willig, Robert D. "Consumer's Surplus without Apology." A.E.R. 66 (Septem- 
ber 1976): 589-97. 