Chong  Wang 
Alfred  Forke 


MAY  2  1  1009 


FROM  THE  GIFT  OF 

Harold  Jefferson  Coolid^e 

(CUM  of  189a) 

OK  BOSTON 
For  the  purchase  of  Books  relating  tn  China 


LUN-HENG. 

PART  I.  ' 

PHILOSOPHICAL  ESSAYS  OF  WANG  CH  UNG. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  CHINESK  AND  ANNOTATKD 


HY 


ALFRED  FORKE. 

l'UOFLSSOK  OF  CII1NKSE  AT  THK  SKMINAK  Wll  OKIKNTAI.^CHK  .SPKACIIKN.  BKKMN 


1907. 

LEIPZIG  LONDON  SHANGHAI 

(in'O  HAHRASSOWITZ.  IA  /.AC  &  CO.  KKLI.Y  k  WALSH  LIMITED. 


Digitized  by  Go 


—1、  %^ 


PKINTKI)  ItV  THK  IMPKK1.M.  l.KIOIAN  PIUMIMi  OFK1CK.  BEKUN 


Digitized  by  Gc^Ogl 


CONTENTS. 


Prpfarr   1 

lMtrodu(、ti'"i:- 


1.  The  Life  of  Wang  Cirung 


•J.  Tii«'  \Vork.、  o!'  W;"i"'  ( 'l/uui:  

s 

Wang  Ciruiig*s  Pliilofiopliy  •  

A.  Htot/rnphtral. 
1.  Autohio^rapliv  (Tsr-clii  i.     Hk.  XXX.  (、l"'q,.  I  • 

•  .  tit 

2.  Keplirs  in  S,'ir-IW,，','  (Tui-tso).    Hk.XXIX,  C1i.i[k 

11  

. .  s;i 

li.   M r taphymca  L 

. •  92 

4.  The  Nature  of  Tl— «  (Wu-»liih).    hi  III,  Cliap.V 

. . 10：{ 

.").  P]i<uioniiHi;il  (，liaii"','、  i I'i，'i，-t  mi::'.    Hk.  XV，  （'liap.  I 

. . 

ti.  On  KopriiTKind**  (Ch'iiMi-kao).    Bk.  XIV,  Chap.  Ill  . 

. . 1 1：) 

7.  Hcavon's  Original  (； ift  (Cl/u-ping).    HL  III,  *  h.i]>.  Ill 

8,  What  in  meant  by  Destiny  ?  (Min^-yi).    Hk.  II,  Chap 

. II. . . . , 

. . 136 

On  Destiny  and  Fnrtune  (Minu'-I'H.    Hk.  I,  Chap.  Ill 

. . 144 

10.  On  Chanoe  and  Luck  (H.sing-ou).    Bk.  11,  Chap.  I  . 

•    .  If.1 

11.  W*ron^  Notions  aljout  Ha|>【,i，i，、,、s  ( Fn-hsuK           VI.  ('haji,  I    . - 

. . 15(5 

12.  Wrong  Notions  on  Unhappiness  (Huo-lusfl).    Hk.  VI,  Chap.  II  . . . 

. . l"l 

13.  Auspicious  I'orteiiLs  ((； hi-yen).    Kk.  II,  Chap.  V  • . 

. . 17:; 

15.  On  Death  (Lun-ssc).    Bk,  XX,  Chap.  Ill  .... 

. •  un 

16.  False  Reports  about  tlm  Dead  (Sse-woi).    Hk.  XXI, 

Chap.  I   . . . 

. . 202 

】7.  Spook  tStorie.H  ((，hi-y''"i),    Hk.  XXII,  Chaji.  I  . . . 

. . '2'」" 

18.  All  about  Ghosts  (Tin^-kuci),    Bk,  XXII,  Cliap.  U 

. . 231» 

C.  Physical. 

. . 2h0 

20.  On  the  San  (Shuo-jih).    Bk.  XI，  Ornp,  II  ... . 

. . 258 

•21.  On  Heat  mul  Cu]d  (Han-wrn).    Hk.  XIV,  CrKij..  II  . 

. . 27s 

22.  On  Thunder  and  Lightning  (Lei-hsQ).   Bk.  VI,  Chap. 

IV  

. . 2N5 

23.  On  Poison  (Ycn-tu).    Bk.  XXII!,  Chap.  I  . . . , 

. . 2<IS 

2：).  Long  Lite  and  Vital  Fluid  (ri,i^hou).    Bk.  I，  Chap, 

[V  . . . 

. 313 

od  by  Google 


，.f 

IV  、. 


1，，『 

2(i.  Miracles  (Chi-kuai).    Uk.  Ill,  Cliap.  VI  

. 318 

2'X  On  Dragons  (Lung-hsu).    Bk.  VI,  Chap.  Ill   351 

30.  Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures  (C'hiang-jui).    Bk.  XVI.  Cliap.  IV     .    .  :{.V.> 

，） i  •  i  fic  J: orniiiig  ui  i .'iirtriitters  ioiiuai-iisiiig#*    ok.  11,  v/iitiii.  i  v     ,    •    «  • 

•174 

32.  On  Original  Nature  (Peii-hsing).    Bk.  III，  Chap.  IV  

. .184 

K. 《 viiiijitf  ( p hilo 、 op fi 1 ,  UUto ry  Qn(i  hUot'ict 山， 

OO,  I  I  lllCtalUS  Oil   、  'OtllUCIIls  y  \\  Cli  l\  llli^j.      £>K.  1  A,   I  (1&]>.  1  

quo 

-Cil         I          |1U  it  **<kU      f  、曹 t       \  I  Ol  If  •  1  11 U      (    1    fc;  A、       \  1  j  ■  I  1  tw\               ■{  Ir         jf          I     l|  A  ft  1 

»  viiJSiirca  uii  -■ipiic.iuri  ^  x  s  t"        i  if*     i>k«  w«  i  iiiin. 

.lis 

^itvifi\irt^*i  ok    t  In  n    r  i*\     1  ur*   /  h  oi    Kf;i"、       TIL    \             ii  I 

OOa    OH  H  1  HI           、"1     ""II     J   11      1'，，.      、&  11     J J,             IV ■   4、  f     \_'llilll>  A       ■                 ,        •        •  • 

433 

3(5.  Statement?*  Corrected  (Clirng-shuo).    Bk.  XXVIII,  (，l"，p.  I  

. 147 

37.  Critiral  Remarks  on  Various  Books  (An-shu).    Uk.  XXIX,  riiap.  1, , 

. m 

38.  The  Equality  of  the  Agc^  (X'li  i-sliih).    Bk.  XVIII,  (Imp.  HI    . . , , 

. 471 

3*.*,  Kvag^crationN  i  Yri  tw'iigt,    l»k.  VIL  ( "liap.  II  

. 4H1 

. v.n 

l\    Folklore  ami  rfliffinn. 

41.  Sacrifices  to  the  Departed  (Ssc-vi).    Bk.  XXV,  Chap.  Ill  . 

50.) 

42.  Sacrifircs  (Chi-yi).    Bk.  XXV,  ChajK  IV  

. 51(5 

("ritit-iMiis  im  Noxious  Ii"】i"'i"'(、  ( Pien -stii).    Bk.  X  XIV,  (  hap.  Ill 

. 525 

44.  On  Exorcism  (Chich-ciru).    Bk.XXV,  Chap.  II  

. r>32 

. 5^S 

. 550 

. f»74 

Kirafa  and  Atiilrnfln  

, :'7卜 

！ 


PREFACE, 


On  the  two  principal  philosophical  Chinese  systems,  Confucianism 
and  Taoism  we  are  tolerably  well  informed  by  translations  of  the 
leading  works  and  by  systematical  treatises.  These  two  brandies 
may  be  regarded  as  tlie  most  important,  but  it  would  be  impossible 
to  write  a  history  of  Cliinese  philosophy  without  paying  special 
attention  to  the  various  heterodox  philosoplier«,  whose  views  do 
not  agree  witli  the  current  ideas  of  either  Confucianists  or  Taoists. 
For  that  very  reason  they  are  often  more  interesting  than  the  latter, 
being  original  thinkers,  wlio  disdain  to  resign  themselves  to  merely 
iterating  old  stereotyped  formula.  Many  of  their  tenets  remind  us 
of  similar  arguments  propounded  by  various  philosophical  schools  of 
the  West,  i  have  called  attention  to  the  Epicurean  Yang  C/iu  and  to 
the  Chinese  Sojj/iists  (vid.  Journ.  of  Peking  Orient.  8oc,  vol.  Ill,  p.  203 
and  Journ.  of  (  liina  Branch  of  Royal  Asiat.  Soc,  vol.  XXXIV,  p.  1) 
and  now  beg  to  place  before  the  public  a  translation  of  the  philo- 
sophical essays  of  Wang  Ch  ung,  whom  we  may  well  call  a  Materialkt, 
As  a  first  instalment  I  published,  some  years  ago,  a  paper  ireating 
of  Wntig  Clinngs  ideas  on  Death  and  Immortality  (Journ.  of^Clnna 
Branch  of  Koyal  Asiat.  Soc.  vol.  XXXI,  p.  40).  My  lecture  on  the 
Metaphysics  of  Wang  C/iung,  held  in  1899  before  the  East  Asiatic 
.Section  of  the  Congress  of  Orientalists  at  Rome,  has  not  been  printed, 
the  manuscript  having  been  lost  by  the.  secretaries  of  the  Section. 

Although  he  has  much  in  common  with  the  Confucianists 
and  still  more  with  the  Taoists,  Wang  ('It  wig's  philosophy  does  uot 
lack  originality.  He  is  an  Eclectic,  and  takes  his  materials  from 
wherever  it  -suits  him,  but  he  lias  、vorktnl  it  into  an  elaborate, 
system  such  i\a  did  not  exist  before  ( 7m  Hsi.  Likf  a  true  philo- 
sopher he  has  reduced  tlie  multiplicity  of  things  to  some  few 
fundamental  principles,  by  which  he  explains  every  phenomenon. 
One  or  two  leading  ideas  pervade  his  philosophy  as  ^ Li'ttmotices^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


2 


Lon-Heng. 


The  Lun-h^ng  is  not  a  systematic  digest  of  Wong  Ch  ung's  philo- 
sophy. Chinese  philosophers  like  tho  Greeks  beforo  Aristotle  have 
not  yet  learned  the  art  of  connecting  their  thoughts  so  as  to  form 
a  complete  system,  in  which  ea<，h  chapter  is  tlie  logical  sequemv 
of  the  preceding  one.  Hut  Wong  (  iiung  has  already  made  one  stop 
in  this  direction.  Whereas  tin*  Amileds  and  tlic  works  of  Memius, 
Luh  Tse  and  Clmaitg  Tse  are  hardly  anything'  else  than  collections 
of  detached  aphorisms,  e:"'li  cliajiter  i'iubi':"'ing;  tlu«  most  hetoro- 
geneous  subjects,  each  chapter  of  rlie  l.un-In'nf/  is  a  real  essay,  tlio 
theme  of  whidi  is  given  first  and  adhered  to  tluou^liout.  Hut 
there  is  not  much  contiection  bi'tweeu  ihe  separate  essays. 

These  essays  are  not  all  of  equal  value.  Some  may  |n*rha|»s 
interest  a  Chinese,  but  arc  not  calculated  to  enlist  our  interest.  For 
this  reason  I  have  not  translatfd  the  whole  work,  but  made 
selection.  It  comprises  the  philo^opliical  essays,  :md  of  the  othors 
rhi'  most  characteristic,  enabling  tlit'  reader  to  form  nn  adeqtiato 
idea  of  the  author  an<l  his  poculiarifies.  My  chief  aim  has  been 
to  sot  forth  Wang  Ch  ung's  pliilosophy.  'I'll,*  introduction  contains 
a  sketch  of  his  system,  \\  liich  I  liavc  attemptod  to  abstract  from 
his  writings. 

Of  the  84  essays  of  the  Lun-king  1  have  translated  44.  I  have 
taken  the  liberty  of  arranging  tlu-m  more  systeniatirallv  than  is 
done  in  tho  original,  classing  them  umlci'  several  heads  as  met;«- 
pliysical,  physical,  critical,  religious,  and  folklore.  Th,'  division 
is  not  a  strict  one,  because  with  many  clmpters  it  is  doubtful,  to 
which  class  tlu*y  bolonu'.  KspiM-ially  between  inetaj)ljvsics  and 
physics  it  is  difficult  to  draw  a  distinction,  si  net'  purely  physical 
questions  are  ol'tcn  uvatt'd  metaphysically.  From  a  table  of  con- 
tents of  tlie  Luu-ht'ng  in  its  rntirety  tlie  reader  will  learn  the  subject 
•>!'  tlmse  essays,  whicli  have  not  been  translated,  and  by  its  holp 
I"'  oan  easily  find  the  place,  \vhi<-h  each  chaptor  takes  in  the 
original. 

With  the  exco[»tion  of  the  Autobiography  and  the  two  chapters 
on  Confucim  aiul  Menchta  translated  by  Ihttchinson  (nuna  Keview. 
vol.  VI I  and  VIII)  the  essays  of  Wang  Cli  uug  have  not  been  put 
into  any  European  language  before.  A  Cliinrsc  cominentarv  t<»  tlie 
Lun-hMg  does  not  exist.  I  hope  that  my  translation  may  prove 
trustworthy.  For  any  raisundcrstaiKlin^s,  whicli  in  Cliinese  and 
philosophical  works  particularly  are  unavoidable,  I  count  upon  the 
indulgence  of  i«y  critics. 

As  tar  as  lay  in  my  power.  I  have  endfavourod  to  trace  the 
sources  from  wliich  Wang  Ch  ung  has  quoted,  which  has  not  been 


Digitized  by  CjOO 


Lun-Heng. 


an  easy  task,  and  I  hav^  added  such  explanatory  notes  as  to  enable 
oven  persons  not  knowing  Chinese  to  understand  the  text.  For  the 
many  proper  names  the  iudex  at  the  end  of  the  volume  will  be 
of  advantage.  - 

''  To  my  thinking,  Wang  Ch  ung  is  one  of  the  most  ingenious 
Chinese  writers,  a  satirist  like  Lucian  and  an  esprit  fort  like  Voltaire, 
■whose  Lun-htng  well  deserves  the  widest  publicity. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Lun-Heng:  Introduction. 


INTRODUCTION. 
1.  The  Life  of  Wang  Ch'ung. 

The  principal  data  of  Wang  ( 'It  nm/s  life  are  furnishetl  by  his 
autobiograpliy  and  by  the  biographical  no  lice  in  chapter  79  p.  1  of  the 
Uou  Jlnn-sfiu,  the  History  of  the  Later  Hon  Dynasty,  whi«'Ii  was 
written  by  Fan  VV/i  in  the  5th  cent.  a.d.  aiul  commented  on  by  Prini'e 
('hang  Huai  Hsien  of  the  T'ong  dvnasrv.    There  we  read: 

" Wang  Ch  ung^  whose  style  was  Chung  Jrn.  was  n  nativ,、  of 
S/iang-t/fl  in  K  uei-chi.  His  forefathers  had  immigrated  from  Yitan- 
ck eng  in  the  Wei  circuit.  As  a  boy  he  lost  liis  l'atlier  ami  w  as 
commended  in  liis  villag;''  for  his  filial  piety.  Subse<|iiently  he 
repaired  to  the  capital,  whero  ho  studieii  nr  tlie  aca'lt'm'v. 

The  book  of  】"h/〃i  Shan  Sung  says  that  Wanp  ( 'h  ung  was  a  very  j)rei*ocioiis 
youth.  After  having  entered  the  academy,  lie  composed  an  essay  on  six  scliolars 
on  the  occasion  of  the  otitperor  visiting  the  Imperial  College. 

His  U'aclicr  was  /'an  I'iao  from  Fu-feny.  He  was  very  fond 
of  extensive  readina:,  but  diil  not  trouble  much  about  paragraphs 
or  sentences.  His  familv  being;  poor,  lie  possessed  no  books. 
Therefore  lie  uwd  to  stroll  .about  tlie  market-plaoe  and  tlu'  ^liops 
in  Lotjancf  and  n*;td  the  books  exposed  there  for  sale.  That  whi<'!i 
he  had  onw  read,  he  was  able  to  remember  and  to  iv[»eat.  Thus 
he  had  acquired  a  vast  knowledge  of  the  tenets  of  the  various 
schools  and  systems.  Having  returned  to  his  native  place,  he 
led  a  very  solitary  life  as  n  teaclirr.  Then  he  took  ofCuie  in  the 
prefecture  and  was  appointe«l  sc«T»'tarv,  but  in  conseq nonce  of 
freq uent  remoustranoos  with  his  superiors,  disputes,  and  dis- 
sensions with  his  colleajjuea,  he  liad  to  quit  tlie  service. 

Wring  Ch  any  \uu\  a  strong  penchani  for  discussions.  At  tin* 
outset,  liis  arguments  would  often  appear  rather  queer,  but  his 


The  Life  of  Wang  Ch'ang. 


5 


final  conclusions  were  true  and  reasonable.  Heing  TOiivinctMl  that 
the  ordinary  savants  stuck  too  much  to  tlie  letter,  and  thus 
would  mostly  lose  the  true  meaning,  lie  shut  himself  up  for 
meditation,  and  no  longer  observed  the  ceremonies  of  congratu- 
lation or  coudoh'iioc.  Everywhere  near  the  door,  tht*  windows, 
and  on  the  walls  he  had  his  knives  and  pens  placed,  witli  which 
1"'  w  rote  tlie  Lun-heng  in  85  chapters  containing  over  200,000  words. 

Yuan  Shan  Sung  says  in  his  book  that  at  first  the  Lun-h'ng  written  hy 
Wanff  Ch  ung  was  not  current  in  the  central  provinces.  When  T'mi  Yung  came 
to  Wu,  lie  discovered  it  tliere,  and  used  to  read  it  secretly  as  a  help  to  con- 
versation. Afterwards  Wan^  Lang  became  prefect  of  K'uei-vhi,  and  likewise  got 
into  possesion  of  tlie  book.  On  liis  return  to  llsu-lma  liia  tuuteinporaries  were 
struck  with  the  great  iniprovement  of  his  abilities.  Some  one  remarked  that, 
unless  he  had  met  with  sonic  extraordinary  person,  he  must  have  found  sonic 
extraordinary  book.  They  made  iiive.stigations,  and  found  out  that  in  fact  it  was 
from  the  Lun-hen<f  that  he  had  derived  this  advantage.  Tlieroupon  the  Lun-hrny 
came  uito  vogue.  Pao  Pu  Tse  relates  that  his  ooiuem|joraiic9  grudged  T'mi  Yung 
the  posse-ssion  of  a  rare  book.  Somebody  searched  lor  it  in  the  hiding  place 
behind  hi^  curtains,  and  tliere  in  fact  found  the  Lun-lirng.  He  folded  some 
chapters  together  in  order  to  tako  them  away,  when  T  wi  Ynny  proposed  to  him 
that  they  .should  both  keep  tlio  book,  but  nut  divulge  its  contents. 

lie  explained  tl"'  similarities  and  the  diversities  of  tin* 
different  classes  of  things,  an<l  scttletl  the  coinmon  doubts  and 
errore  of  the  time. 

Tlie  governor  Tuny  Cli in  made  liim  assistant-magistrate. 
Later  on  he  rose  to  tlie  rank  of  a  siib-pn'l'eft.  Then  he  retired 
ami  returned  liome.  A  frit-ntl  ai"l  rellow-countryman  of  his  Usiek 
I  Wu  addressed  a  memorial  to  the  throne,  in  wliich  lie  recom- 
mended Wang  Cli  ung  lor  his  talents  ami  learning. 

In  the  book  of  Hmeh  Ch  nig  it  is  stated  that  in  recommending  Wang  ( 'h'ung, 
Il«ieh  1  Wu  said  that  his  genius  was  a  natural  gif\  and  not  atnjuired  by  learning. 
Even  Mrnciuit  and  Sun  <  king  in  i'orin«r  tinms,  vr  Yuntf  Hnttnyy  Liu  Ilniung,  or 
>V  ma  (  h  ten  more  recently  in  the  Han  epoch  could  not  surpass  liim. 

Su  Tsung  coinniamled  a  chamberlain  to  Kuininon  Wang  Cli  ung 
into  his  presence,  but  owing  to  sickness,  lie  could  not  go.  When 
he  was  nearly  seventy  years  of  age,  his  powers  began  to  decline. 
Then  lit-  wrote  a  book  on  "  Macrobiotics  "  iu  16  chapters,  and 
refraining  from  ai!  dt'siics  aud  j)n>[)ensities.  ami  avoiding  all 
emotions,  he  kept  himself  alive,  until  in  tlie  middle  of  the 
Yung-yuan  period ,  when  lie  died  of  an  illness  at  his  home." 


Lan  -  Heng :  Introduction. 


I»V  Ins  own  trstimony  Wang  Ch'uny  was  horn  in  the  tliinl 
y»*ar  of  the  Cltien-^nt  cycle,  i.  e.  Uu.g._27,  in  Shang-tju-yien,  tlif 
prwnt  Shno-l,ii,tg-fu  of  the  provin<*«*  of  t  hekiang.  His  family  bad 
originally  l>*'i"n  resuling  in  Ytmn-iln'ng  :  Ta-ming-fu  in  Chihli.  His 
father's  nani"  was  Wnny  Sung,  i  )\ving  to  tlu'ir  violent  temper  his 
ain-CMt<>r>i  hud  several  times  been  implicatnl  iti  local  feuds,  which 
are  still  now  of  frequent  "'.rurnMicc  in  Fuki^n  and  Chekia)ig.  ami  、v,'r,' 
coin|K'll<'<l  t<»  cliangc  tli«-ir  domicile.  Wang  Ch  ung's  critics  are  scanda- 
lize^I  at  his  roolly  telling  u»  that  his  great-grantlfatlier  behavod  like 
a  ruffian  iluring  a  la  in  inc.  killing  and  wouniling  his  fellow-pcoplf. 

If  Wung  Ch  ung's  own  description  be  true,  he  must  have  been 
a  paragon  in  his  youtli.  H<，  never  neodrd  any  correction  neitli«*r 
at  tlie  hands  of  U\h  pan'iits  nor  of  his  teachers.  For  his  age  In* 
was  exceptionally  sedate  atxl  serious.  When  he  was  six  years  old, 
lit:  iy"，ivnl  )iis  first  iustniotion,  and  at  the  age  of  8  lie  was  sent 
to  a  public  hcIiooI.  '.n"'r«'  the  teacher  explained  to  liim  tlie  Aun- 
hrts  and  tin*  S/mkiny,  and  he  read  1,000  characters  every  'lay. 
Wlu'ii  lu*  hail  in a^tcm I  the  ('lassies,  one  was  astonished  at  the 
progress  lie  made,  so  Uc  tiai'vely  informs  us.  Of  his  other  attain- 
ments he  sspeaks  in  the  same  strain  and  with  the  same  conceit. 
The  llou  Ilan-shu  confiruis  that  he  was  a  gooil  son. 

Having  lost  his  father  very  ,'arl'v，  he  entered  tlie  Imperial 
College  al  Loyany,  then  the  capital  of  China.  \hn  principal  teacher 
was  tin-  historian  Pan  I'ino,  tlie  lathrr  of  l^m 八'" ， author  of  the 
History  of  th<'  Form，'r  Ilan  dynasty.  In  Loyang  lie  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  vast  amount  of  knowledge  by  which  he  distitiguislied 
himself  later  on,  and  became  acquainted  with  the  tlieories  of  tl"' 
various  si-IiooIm  of  thought,  many  of  which  he  vigorously  attacks 
in  his  wiKin^s.  His  aim  was  to  grasp  the  ^oueral  gist  of  what 
In*  iva<l，  and  li<;  did  not  care  so  much  for  minor  details.  Tho 
majority  of  the  scholars  of  his  time  conversely  would  cling  to  the 
words  and  seutences  and  over  these  iniuuti.-c  quite  forget  tb*' 
whole.  Heing  too  poor  to  buy  all  the  books  rt'quiml  to  satiate 
liis  liuntftT  for  knowledge,  he  would  saunter  about  in  the  market- 
place  and  book-shops«  and  peruse  the  books  ox[)ostfcd  there  fnr 
sale,  having  probably  made  some  sort  of  agreement  witli  the  book- 
sellers, who  may  liave  taken  an  interest  in  tlie  ardent  student. 
His  excel lrnt  memory  was  of  great  srrvioc  to  liim,  for  he  could 
remember,  t'ven  repeat  what  lie  had  once  read.  At  tlie  same  time 
his  critical  genius  devcloprd.  lie  liked  to  argue  a  point,  and 
though  his  views  often  seemed  paradoxical,  his  oppom'iits  could 
Mot  but  admit  tlu»  justiioss  of  liis  ar^uinrnts. 


Digitized  by 


The  Life  of  Waiig  Ch  ung. 


7 


Having  conipK'tcd  his  studies,  Wang  CU  un(j  returne<l  to  his 
native  pl:"v，  \vl»ero  lie  boraine  a  teacher  and  lived  a  very  quiet 
lift1.  Subsc([uently  he  took  office  and  sn-urcd  a  sm:ill  position  us  a 
sK-rctary  ol"  a  district,  a  post  which  he  also  filled  under  a  military 
governor  and  a  prefect.  At  last  In*  was  promoted  to  be  assist ant- 
inagistrato  of  a  tli'partnient.  He  would  liave  us  believe  that  lie 
was  a  very  j^ood  official,  and  that  his  relations  to  his  colleagues 
w  ere  excellent.  Tlie  Hon  Uau-.s/m,  on  tlie  otht'r  hand,  tolls  us  tliat 
h<*  remonstrated  so  mucli  with  his  superiors  and  was  so  (|uarrel- 
sciine,  tliat  lie  had  to  leave  tlie  service.  This  version  seems  tlie 
more  probable  of  the  two.  Wang  (  h  ung  was  mucii  too  iiulependtMit, 
much  too  outspoken,  ami  too  clever  to  do  tlu*  routine  business 
well,  wliicli  requires  clerks  and  seoretarit's  of  moderate  abilities,  or 
to  serve  under  superiors,  wlioin  he  surpassed  l)v  liis  talents.  So 
lit*  devoted  himself  oxrlusively  to  his  studios.  I Ie  Hved  in  ratlier 
straitene<l  in rtru instances,  but  supjiorted  Ins  emha rassmcnts  with  phi- 
losophical equaniinity  and  clicorrultiess.  "Although  lie  was  poor 
and  liad  not  an  acre  to  dwell  upon,  his  mind  was  freer  tlian  that 
uf  kings  and  dukes,  and  tliough  ho  liad  no  omoluments  counted 
l>y  [)ecks  and  bushels,  he  tVlt,  as  if  lie  had  ten  thousand  chnuy  to 
live  upon,  lie  enjoyed  a  tranquil  Jiappincss,  but  his  desires  did 
not  run  riot,  and  though  lie  was  living  in  a  statf  of  poverty,  liis 
energy  was  not  broken.  The  study  of  ancient  litoratuiv  was  his 
debauchery,  and  strange  storii-s  his  relish."  IIo  had  a  gmit  ad- 
miration lor  superior  men,  and  liked  to  associate  with  peopl*'  rising 
above  inetliocrity.  As  long  as  lio  was  in  office  and  well  oil',  lie 
had  many  friends,  but  most  of  them  abautloiied  liiui,  when  he  had 
retire<l  into  privato  life. 

Iu  a.u.  86  Wang  ('li imy  emigrated  into  tbe  |)n)vince  of  Anhui, 
Nvhere  he  was  appointed  sub-[)relVrt,  the  higlicist  post  wliich  he 
lield,  but  two  years  only,  lor  in  88  he  gave  up  liis  oificial  career, 
which  had  not  been  a  brilliant  one.  The  reason  of  liis  resignation 
this  time  seems  to  have  been  ill  health. 

"So  far  Wang  C/iuruj  had  not  su<-i  ee<led  in  attracting  tlie  atten- 
tion ol'  the  emperor.  An  essay  which  he  hud  composed,  when 
tlie  emperor  liad  visited  tlie  college  of  Loyang,  had  passed  unno- 
ticed. In  the  year  70,  when  parts  of  Hotian  were  sulIVriiig  from 
a  great  dearth,  Wany  Clt  ung  presented  a  iiKMiiorial  to  the  Emperor 
( han(j  7 V  in  which  he  propwl  measures  to  prohibit  dissipation 
and  extravagancies,  and  to  provide  for  the  time  of  need,  but  his 
suggestions  were  not  accepted.  He  did  not  fare  better  with  another 
anti-alcoliolic  memorial,  iu  wliicli  he  advocated  tlie  prohibition  of 


Lan  - 1  I*ng :  Introdurtion. 


the  us,'  of  spirits.  When  finally  the  Kinperor  bt'caino  aware  of 
Wang  Cltnng^  it  was  too  late.  A  friend  and  a  countryman  of  his, 
！ hieh  I  Mm  recommemlod  him  to  tl»c  tliroue  for  tiis  talents  and 
great  learning,  saying  that  neither  Meticitts  or  Hsfln  Tse  nor  in  the 
Han  time  Yang  llsinug^  Liu  Ihiang  or  Sse  Ma  CU  ien  could  outsliine 
him.  The  Emperor  Cluing  Ti  (7<i  88  a.d.)  summoned  hiin  to  his 
presence,  but  owing;  to  his  ill-lteaitli  Wang  C/t  ung  had  to  det'line 
tlie  lionour.  His  stato  liad  impaired  so  much,  that  already  in  89 
he  thought  that  his  end  had  come.  Hut  tlie  next  two  years  pass- 
ed, and  \w  did  not  die.  He  found  ev«>n  tlie  time  to  write  a  book 
od  "  Ma(:robi(》tios,"  which  he  put  into  practice  himself,  observiiii>, 
a  strict  diet  and  avoiding  all  u^itations  in  order  to  keep  his  vital 
fluid  intact,  until  ho  expired  in  the  miildle  of  tlie  Yung-yuan  perioil 
(89-104)  about  the  year  97.  Tlu*  exact  year  is  not  known. 


2.  The  Works  of  Wang  Ch'ung. 

Wang  Chungs  last  work,  the  Ymtg-hMny-$htt  or  Mtwrolnotica  iti 
16  chapters,  wliicli  he  wrote  some  years  before  liis  death,  lias 
been  iiK-utionetl.  His  first  productions  werr  the  C/ti-stt-c/in/i-f/i 
" Censures  <m  (  oinmon  Morals"  in  12  chapters  and  tlie  Chrny-uu, 
a  book  on  Ciovernment,  botli  piv,，e(l"ig  liis  juincipal  work,  tlie 
Lun-Mny,  in  wliich  they  are  several  times  referred  to  in  the  two 
biographical  chapters. 

Wnng  Cli ung  wrote  his  "(ensures"  as  a  protest  against  tl"' 
man ne  1-8  of  his  time  witli  a  view  to  rouse  tin*  public  I'onscieme. 
He  was  prompted  to  write  tliis  work  by  tl"'  heartlessuess  of  his 
former  irit!n(ls,  wlio  abandoned  hini,  when  lie  was  poor,  and  of 
tlie  world  in  general.  To  be  read  and  understood  by  the  people, 
not  the  literati  only,  ho  adopted  an  easy  and  popular  »tylt\  Thin 
appears  to  have  been  contran'  to  custom ,  for  Uv  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  justify  himself  (p.  71). 

'J  hc  work  on  government  owes  its  origin  to  the  vain  efforts 
of  the  Imperial  Governinent  of  his  time  to  administer  tlie  Empire. 
They  did  not  see  tlieir  way,  being  ignorant  of  the  t'undaniental 
principles  (p.  70).  From  the  Chimj-wu  the  territorial  officials  were 
to  learn  what  thoy  needed  most  iu  their  admiuistratioii,  and  tho 
people  should  be  induced  "  to  retonii  and  gratefully  afknowliMlire 
tin*  kindiH'Jis  of  tl"'  government (p.  DO). 


igitized  by  VjOOQle 


The  Works  of  Wang  Ch  ung. 


9 


These  three  works:  tlie  Marrobioti^s,  the  Censures  on  Morals, 
and  the  work  on  Government  have  all  bei-n  lost,  and  solely  the 
Lmt-heng  has  come  down  to  us.  Whereas  tlic  ('hi-ttu-rhieh-rji  censures 
the  cuimnon  morals,  the  hun-heiuj  :— _  Disifui^k'um.s  tests  and  criticises 
the  mminoii  errors  and  superstitions,  tho  formor  bein<r  more  etlnoal, 
tlie  latter  speculative.  Many  of  tliese  errors  arc  derived  from  U"， 
fiirrcnt  literature,  classical  as  well  as  popular.  Wnny  Ch  ttug  takes 
up  these  buuUs  and  points  out  when'  tliey  arc  wrong.  He  avoids 
all  wild  spccuKttions,  which  he  cotulemns  in  others,  so  he  says 
(p.  91).  The  Litn-heny  is  not  professedly  a  pliilosuphical  work, 
intended  to  'set.  fortli  a  philosophical  system,  but  in  confuting  and 
contesting  the  views  of  others,  Wang  Ch  ung  incideiitally  develops 
his  own  piiilosophy.  In  this  respect  there  is  a  certain  rosornblance 
with  the  Vteodicee  of  Leibniz,  whi<  li,  strictly  speaking,  is  a  polemic 
against  Bayle.  Wang  Ch  ung's  aim  in  writing  the  Lunching  was 
purely  practical,  as  becomes  plain  from  some  of  Ins  utterances. 
" The  nine  chapters  ol'  the  Lun-heng  on  Inventions,  and  the  three 
chapters  of  the  Lwi-hmg  on  Exajj^erations,  says  he,  are  intended 
to  impress  people,  that  they  must  strive  for  truthfulness."  Even 
sucli  high  inetapliysical  problems  as  that  of  immortality  he  re- 
gards from  a  practical  point  of  view.  Otherwise  he  would  uot 
write,  as  he  does:—"  I  liave  written  the  essays  on  Death  and  on 
the  False  Reports  about  Death  to  show  that  the  deceased  have  no 
consciousness,  and  (tan not  become  gluists,  hopiug  that,  as  soon  as 
my  readers  have  grasped  this,  tliey  will  restrain  the  extravagance 
of  the  burials  and  become  econouiical  "  (p.  90). 

From  a  passage  (Chap.  XXXVIII)  to  the  effect  that  the  reiguiug 
- sovereign  was  continuing  the  prosperity  of  Ktutng  Wu  '/，'•  (25— 57a. i).) 
and  Ming  Ti  (58-75)  it  appears  that  the  Lun-h^ng  was  written 
under  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  ( hang  'ti  rh.  between  76  and 
89  a.d.  From  another  remark  tliat  in  the  Chuing-jui  chapter  (XXX) 
the  auspicious  portents,  of  the  Yiutn-ho  aud  Chang-ho  epochs  (84—86 
and  87-88)  could  not  be  mentioned,  because  of  its  being  already 
completed,  we  may  infer  that  the  wliolc  work  was  iinished  be  ft)  re 
84.    Thus  it  must  date  from  tlic  years  76-84  a.d. 

The  Luu-hhig  iu  its  present  form  consists  of  ,50  books  com- 
prising 85  chapters  or  separate  essays.  Ch  ien  Liiiuja  Catalogue 
(Sse-k'tt-ch(ian-shu~tAiatt/-mu  oliap.  120  p.  1 )  shows  that  we  do  not  possess 
the  Lun-Ung  in  its  entirety,  hi  tiis  autobiography  Wang  Ch  ung 
states  that  his  work  »-ontains  more  than  a  hundred  cltapters 
(p.  78)，  conscqut'iitly  a  number  of  chapters  must  liave  been  lost. 
The  85  chapters!  mcntioued  ahovf  are  enumerated  in  the  index 


Digitized  by  Google 


10 


Lun -I long:  Introditctiott. 


preceding 言 lie  text,  but  of  tlio  44t!i  chapter  "  Vhao-rhih  "  we  liave 
merely  tlu«  title,  but  not  tlu*  text  so,  that  the  number  ol' chapters 
really  existing;  is  reduced  to  84.  The  chapters  exceeding  85  must 
have  already  lost  in  the  first  centuries,  for  we  read  in  the 

llou  llnn-shu  of  the  5th  cent.  a.d.  that  Wamj  Ch  ung  wrote  the  Lnn- 
Mug  in  85  cliapters. 

Some  interesting  data  about  llie  histoiy  of  the  text  arc  lur- 
nishe<l  in  another  History  of  (lie  Later  llan  Dynasty,  the  llou 
Ilan-s/m  of  Ytuin  S/itm  Sung  of  tin*  ( '/tin  epooh  (265-4 li)  .、.，》•)，  who 
lived  anterior  to  Fan  Yt'li,  the  author  of  tl»e  offifialiy  rcc<i«itnsecl 
lliston  of  the  Later  lion.  Yiuin  S/ion  Sung's  History  was  in  100  books 
(cf.  J  J  tai  ining  /isu'ti  fit'h  nil  .、'/〃•/*  Using  p  u  chap.  44,  p.  85  v.).  but  it 
lias  not  been  inrorporatod  into  the  1  wenty-1'our  dynastic  Histories. 
Yuwt  Shan  whose  work  is  quoted  by  several  critics,  informs 

us  that  at  lirst  tlio  Lmi-heug  was  only  current  in  the  southern 
provinces  of  China  w  lie  re  Wang  (  h  ung  had  lived.  There  it  was* 
discovered  by  Tsai  Yung  (133-192  a.d.)  a  scholar  of  note  from  the 
north,  but  instead  of  comniUDicating  it  to  otliers,  lie  kept  it  for  him- 
self, reading  it  secretly  "  as  a  lielp  to  conversation  "  i.  e.  he  plunclere«l 
the  Luu-luhig  to  b<'  able  to  shine  in  conversation.  Another  scholar, 
WaiKj  J,fW(/  ol'  the  2nd  aud  3d  cent.  a.i>.  is  reported  to  have  behaved 
in  a  similar  way,  when  he  became  prefect  of  K  tiei-chi,  wliere  he 
found  the  Lun-haxj.  Ilis  friends  susprrtcd  liim  of  having  come 
into  possession  of  an  extraordinary  1 謂 I"  whence  he  took  liis  wis- 
dom. They  soan-lifd  lor  it  and  found  the  Lun-h^ng,  whicli  sub- 
st*([uently  became  universally  known.  The  Taoist  writer  Ko  Hung 
of  tlie  4th  rent,  a.ik,  known  as  l\u>  />'"  rJ\e,  recounts  that  the 
Lun-hen(j  concealed  by  T  sai  Yung  was  discovered  in  tlie  same  way. 
At  all  events  '/'',"〃•  Yuikj  and  Wuuy  Long  s(>'、m  to  liave  been  instru 
mental  in  preserving  and  transmitting  tlie  Lun-li^nrj. 

In  the  History  of  the  Sui  dyuastv  (580-f)18  .、.".),  Sui-.<hu 
chap.  34  p.  7  v.,  an  edition  of  the  Lun-Ung  in  29  books  is  inentiotied, 
wliereas  、ve  have  30  books  now.  The  rommentary  to  this  passage 
observes  that  under  the  Limxj  dynasty  (502-55G  a.d.)  thrre  was  the 
TuiKj-ln'il  in  1)  books  and  1  book  of  Keraarks  written  by  Viiuf 
but  that  both  works  are  lost.  Tlicy  srem  to  liave  been  treatises 
on  the  Lun-fi^iig,  of  which  there  are  none  now  left.  Tlie  Catalogue 
of  tlie  Hooks  in  the  History  of  tlie  T  <v>g  dynasty  {Ch  u-n  T  tmg-s/iu 
cliap.  47  p.  8)  lias  tlie  entry: ―  "  Lun-Mng  30  books." 

At  prcsi'iit  tlu1  Lun-lu'ng  forms  part  of  the  well  known  col- 
lection of  、vurks  of  the  llan  and  Wei  times,  the  Han  Wei  tsung-shu 
dating  from  tlie  Miny  dynasty.     The  text  of  the  Lun-luuy  cou-. 


zed  by  Google 


The  Works  of  Wang  Ch  ung. 


li 


tained  in  the  large  collection  of  philosophical  works,  the  7!vf  shu 
po  cAii,  is  only  a  reprint  from  tlie  llan  Wei  tmng-shti.  In  his  useful 
little  biographical  index,  Shu-mu-OnKj  Chang  ('hilt  Tung  records 
a  separate  edition  of  the  Lun-h^ng  printed  under  the  Ming  dynasty. 
I  have  not  secii  it  and  do  not  know,  wlietlior  it  is  still  to  be  found 
in  tho  book-shops,  and  whether  it  (Hirers  from  the  current  text. 
In  the  many  quotations  from  tlie  Lun-heng  of  the  Tai-ping  Yd  lan 
(Urh  cent,  A.n.)  there  is  hardly  any  divergence  from  the  reading  of 
our  text.    A  commeutary  to  the  Ltm-lihig  has  not  been  written. 

In  the  appreciation  of  liis  countrymeii  W'any  Ck  ung  does  " 
not  rank  very  high.  ( '/too  hung  \\  n  (12th  cent,  a.d.)  opines  tliat 
tfTe  Lun-heng  falls  sliort  of  tlie  elegant  productions  of  the  Former 
Han  epoch.  Another  critic  of  the  12t)i  cent.,  Kno  Sse  Sun  is  still 
more  severe  in  his  judgment.  IK*  declares  tlie  Lun-lirng  to  bo  a 
metlley  of  heterogeneous  masses,  \v ritU*n  in  a  bad  style,  in  wliich 
morality  does  not  take  the  pla'.e  it  ouglit.  After  his  view  the  Lun- 
ItMg  would  liave  no  intrinsic  value,  being  notliing  more  than  a 
" help  to  conversation."  Wang  ./'"  IIou  aiul  others  coudoinn  the 
L\m-hing  on  account  of  the  autlior's  impious  utterances  regarding 
his  ancestors  and  liis  attacks  upon  tl"'  Sage  Coufucius.  That  lie 
criticised  Mencitis  mi^lit  be  excused,  but  to  dare  to  find  fault  witli 
Confucius  is  an  unpardonable  crime.    That  mars  the  wliolo  work. 

In  modern  times  a  change  of  opinion  in  favour  of  Wang  Ch  ung 
seems  to  have  taken  place  In  his  Prefatory  Notice  to  the  L""- 
h^ng、  Yu  ( hun  1/4  pours  down  unrestricted  praise  upon  liim.  "People 
of  the  Han  period,  he  remarks,  were  fond  of  fictions  and  fallacies. 
Wang  Ui  ung  pointed  out  whatever  was  wrong;  in  all  his  arguments 
lie  used  a  strict  and  thorough  inotho«l,  and  paid  special  attention 
to  meanings.  Rejecting  erroneous  notions  he  came  near  the  trutli. 
Nor  was  he  afraid  of  disagreeing  witli  the  worthies  of  old.  Tims 
lie  furthered  the  laws  of  the  State,  and  oponed  the  eyes  and  oars 
of  the  scholars.  People  reading  his  books  felt  a  chill  at  first,  but 
then  they  repudiated  all  falseliood,  and  bt-came  just  and  good. 
Tliey  were  set  right,  and  discarded  all  crooked  doctrines.  It  is 
as  if  somebody  amidst  a  clamouring  itrowd  in  the  markt't-place 
lifts  the  seal i*:  then  the  weights  and  prices  ol'  、vam?  are  equitably 
determined,  and  every  strife  ceases." 

To  a  certain  extent  at  least  tlie  Ch  ien  Lung  Catalogue  does 
him  justice,  while  characterising  liis  strictures  on  Con/tuius  aud 
Mencius  and  his  disrespect  towards  liis  forefathers  、vicke(l  and 
perverse,  its  critics  still  admit  tlint  in  exposing  falsehoods  and  de- 
nouncing wliat  is  base  and  low   he  generally  hits  the  truth,  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


12 


Lun  -  Hong :  Introduction. 


that  by  his  investigations  lie  has  done  raut'h  lor  tin*  furtherance  of 
culture  aud  civilization.    They  cou elude  by  saying  tliat,  although 
Waiig  Ch  ung  be  impugned  by  many,  lie  will  always  have  admirers. 

1  presume  tliat  most  Europeans,  untrainelled  by  Chinese  moral 
prejudices,  will  rather  be  among  liis  admirers,  and  fall  in  with 
Mayers  speaking  of  Wang  Clt  uug  as  "a  philosopher,  perhaps  the 
most  original  and  judicious  among  all  the  metaphysiciaas  Cliina 
hvLH  produced ,  .  .  .  who  in  tl"'  writings  derived  1'roin  liis  pen, 
forming  a  work  in  thirty  books,  entitled  Critical  Disquisitions  '  Lnt\' 
lienyy'  handles  mental  and  pliysi«*al  problems  in  a  stylo,  and  witlt  a 
boldness  unparallelled  in  Chinese  literature"  ( Header' s  Manual 
N.  795). 

The  first  translator  of  the  two  chapters  on  Confucius  and 
Mencim  and  of  the  autobiography,  /lutchmson,  says  of  tlie  Lun- 
/'^'y:— "Tlie  whole  book  will  repay  perusal,  treating  as  it  does 
of  a  wide  nmge  of  subjects,  enabling  us  to  form  some  idea  of  the 
state  of  tlie  Chinese  mind  at  tlit'  cornnienceinerit  of  tlie  Christian  era. 

Tlic  subjects  (treated)  are  well  calculated  to  enlist  the  interest 
of  the  student  ami  would  most  probably  shetl  much  liglit  upon 
tlie  history  of  Chinese  Metaphysics "  (China  Review  vol.  VII, 
P-  40). 

In  my  opiaion  Wang  Clt  nng  is  one  of  the  greatest  Chinese 
thinkers.  As  a  speculative  philosopher  \\v  leaves  Confucius  and 
Metuuus,  who  are  only  moralists,  far  beliiud.  He  is  inucli  more 
judicious  than  Lao  Tue,  C/itutng  Tse.  or  .1/^'  TL  We  might  perhaps 
place  him  on  a  level  with  CI  at  I  Li,  the  great  philosopher  of  the 
Sung  time,  in  point  of  abilities  at  least,  for  their  philosophies  (lillor 
very  much. 

In  most  Chinese  works  Wang  Clt  uny  is  placed  among  the 
Miscellaneous  Writers  or  the  Eclectics  "  Tsn  C/iia,"  who  do  not 
belong  to  one  single  school,  Confuciauisui,  Mehism,  or  Tuoisiu,  but 
conibiiic  the  doctrines  of  various  schools.  Many  ( li  ung  is  trt'att'tl 
as  an  Eclectic  in  (lie  histories  of  the  Sui  dyuaaty  aud  the  l  ong 
<lynu«ty,  in  C/i  icn  Lung  s  C-atalogite,  and  in  the  7 '»e-sh n-po -chin .  Chang 
(J I nl>  Tuny,  liovvevcr,  enumerates  him  among  the  C'oul'ucianists,  and 
so  does  baiter  (Doctrines  of  Om/ucius  p.  31).  Although  he  has  not 
Ix'cmi  the  louiuler  of  a  school,  1  would  rather  assign  to  him  a 
place  apart,  to  whicli  his  importance  as  u  philosopher  entitles  liim. 
It  matters  not  that  his  inlluence  lias  been  very  slight,  and  that 
the  Cliinese  know  so  little  of  liim.  His  work  is  hardly  read,  but 
is  extensively  quoted  iu  dictionaries  and  cyclopedias.  At  any  rate 
Wanff  Ch  img  is  more  of  au  Eclectic  thau  a  Confucianist.  The  Chinese 


Wang  Ch  ung's  Philosophy. 


13 


qualify  as  "  Tsn  Cl,ia"  all  those  original  writers  wliom  they  cannot 
place  under  any  other  head.  Wang  Ch  ung  seems  to  regard  liiraself 
as  a  Confucianist.  No  other  philosopher  is  more  frequently  men- 
tioned by  ltim  than  Con/mius,  wlio,  though  he  finds  fault  with  him 
here  and  there,  is  still,  in  \m  eyes,  the  Sogn.  Wang  Ch  ung  is  most 
happy,  when  he  can  prove  an  assertion  by  quoting  the  authority 
of  Confucius.  This  explains  how  lie  came  to  be  classed  by  others 
with  the  Confucianists. 


3.  Wang  Ch'ung's  Philosophy. 

At  first  sight  Wong  C/i  ung's  philosophy  might  seem  dualistic, 
for  he  recognises  two  principles,  wliich  are  to  a  certain  extent 
opposed  to  eacli  other,  the  Van'/  and  the  Yin  fluid.  But,  although 
the  former,  which  is  conreiveil  as  forming  heaven  as  well  as  tlie 
liuman  min<l.  be  more  subtle  than  the  latter,  from  、vlii,'li  the  earth 
has  been  created,  yet  it  is  by  no  means  immaterial.  Hoth  these 
principles  liave  been  evolved  from  Chaos,  when  the  original  fluitl 
became  (liflerentiated  and  split  into  two  substances,  a  finer  one, 
Yang,  and  a  coarst'r  on<».  Yin.  Wc  do  not  find  a  purely  spiritual 
or  transoerulent  correlate  to  those  two  substances  sucli  e.  g.  as  Too, 
the  all-einbraoinp;  mystical  force  of  the  Taoists,  or  Li  u  Reason," 
which  in  C/tu  !hi，s  system  rules  over  Matter  "rii'i,"  and  thus  makes 
this  system  truly  (lualisti<*.  \\von  Fate,  wliirh  takes  tsucli  a  pro- 
minent pla«"e  in  Wang  Ch  wty's  philosophy,  lias  been  ma"'i'ialis'.'(l 
by  him,  ami  it  is  hardly  anything  more  than  a  sort  of  a  natural 
law.  We  cannot  be  far  wrong,  if  we  chara«'tcri^e  his  philosophy 
as  a  materialistic  monism. 

Compared  witli  western  thought  Wanf/  Ch  wuj  s  system  bears 
some  resemblance  to  tlie  natural  philosophv  of  Epicurus  and  l^ucretius. 
In  the  East  we  find  some  kindred  traits  among  the  Indian  mate- 
rialists, the  Chdrvdka^. 

Epicurus  atta(，l"'s  great  importance  to  pli.、、irs.  Tin*  knowledge 
of  the  natural  causes  of  tilings  shall  be  an  antidotf  against  super- 
stitions. Wang  Ch  ung  likewise  takes  a  lively  interest  in  all  pliysifal 
problems,  and  tries  to  base  liis  arguDicnts  on  exprrionoc,  as  far  as 
possible.  He  wislies  to  explain  nil  natural  plioiiomena  by  natural 
causes.  His  method  is  quite  modi-ni.  If  he  oftru  falls  into  error 
ilFrertheless,  it  is  not  so  much  owing  to  bad  reasoning  as  to  tlie 


Digitized  by  Google 


14 


Lun  -  H«"  ng :  Introduction. 


poor  state  of  (  liinese  st-ienoe  at  liis  【ime.  He  reganls  many  things  as 
proved  by  experience,  wliich  an*  not,  and  in  spite  of  his  radicalism 
lias  still  too  much  veneration  for  the  sayings  of  old  classical  authors, 
Wang  ( 7i  unff's  views  a^ree,  in  many  respects,  with  the  Kpi- 
eureaii  Phvsirs;,  but  not  with  its  Eudjrinonolofjy  and  Sensualism, 
liis  Ktliics  bem'f  totally  different.  Ethical  Ej)iciir»'anisni  has  its 
representative  in  China  in  the  pro-Christian  philosopher  Yang  (  Am,  who 
seems  to  have  coiwornetl  himself  with  Ktliics  exclusively,  wliercas 
Wang  Ch  ung  has  especially  dovoted  himself  to  the  study  of  meta- 
physical and  physical  miestions.  The  professed  aim  of  the  philo- 
sophy of  Epiatrus  is  human  happiness.  By  delivering  them  from 
errors  and  superstitions  \w  intends  to  inider  people  liap|>y.  Wang 
Ch  uny  likewise  hopes  to  do  away  with  all  inventions,  fictions,  and 
falsehoods,  but  in  doing  so  he  has  frutli,  aiul  not  so  much  happi- 
ness in  view. 

a)  Metaphysics. 

The  pivots  of  Wang  Ch' unifs  pliilosopliy  are  Heaven  and  Earth, 
whicli  have  been  forint'd  of  the  two  fluids,  Yang  aud  Yin.  "  The 
fluids  of  the  V7/j  and  Yat)g,  he  says,  arc  the  fluids  of  Heaven  and 
Earth  "  (C'liap.  XXX).  These  two  principl«*s  are  not  of  Wang  Ch  ung  s 
invention,  tlu*y  are  mot  with  in  ancient  Chinese  literature,  in  the 
Y iking  and  the  Liki  for  instance  (see  Tc/ioh  Hi,  Sa  Doctrine  et  son 
influentv,  par  乂  Le  Gall  Chang-hat  1894,  p.  35). 

Karth  is  known  to  ds,  it  has  a  material  body  like  man 
(p.  93),  but  what  are  we  to  undorstand  by  Heaven?  Is  it  a  spirit, 
the  Spirit  of  Heaven  or  (iod,  or  merely  an  expanse  of  air,  the 
Blue  Kmpvreaii,  or  a  substance  similar  to  that  of  Earth  ？  Wang 
Cliung  considors  all  tliese  possibilities  and  derides  in  favour  of  the 
last.  4k  Men  are  crpatod  by  heavon,  why  then  grmlge  it  a  body?" 
he  asks.  "  Heaven  is  not  air,  but  lias  a  body  on  high  and  far 
from  men  "  (Chap.  XIX).  "  To  him  wlio  considers  the  question,  as 
we  have  clone,  it  becomes  evident  that  heaven  cannot  be  something 
difluse  and  vague."  His  reasons  are  that  heaven  has  a  certain 
distance  from  eartli,  which  by  Chinese  mathematicians  lias  been 
calculated  at  upwards  of  60,000  Li,  and  that  the  constellations 
known  as  tlie  solar  mansions  art'  attached  to  it.  Thcsr  arguments 
seem  strange  to  us  now,  but  we  nmst  bear  in  mind  that  tlie  Greeks, 
tlie  Babylonians,  and  the  Jews  Iifld  (juite  similar  views,  regarding 
heaven  as  an  iron  or  a  brazen  vault,  the  44  firmament "  to  which  the 
sun.  the  moon,  and  tlie  stars  were  fixed,  or  supposing  even  quite  a 
number  of  celestial  splicres  ouo  above  the  other,  as  AriMotU  does. 


igitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch'uiig's  Philosophy. 


15 


With  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  universe  Wang  Ch'ung  simply 
adopts  tl"'  old  creation  theory,  on  wliich  lie  writes  as  follows: ― 
" The  commentators  of  the  Yiking  say  that  previous  to  tl"'  separ- 
ation of  the  priinogenial  vapours,  there  was  a  chaotic  and  uniform 
mass,  and  the  books  of  the  Literati  speak  of  a  wild  medley,  and 
of  air  not  yet  separated.  When  it  came  to  be  separated,  the  pure 
elements  formed  lieaven,  and  t\\c  impure  ones,  oartli.  According 
to  the  expositors  of  the  YikiiKj  and  the  writings  of  the  Literati 
tlio  bodies  of  lieaveti  and  earth,  wlien  they  first  became  separated, 
were  still  small,  and  they  、voiv  not  far  distant  from  each  other  " 
(foe.  cit.).  In  conformity  with  this  vk'、v  Heaven  and  Earth  were 
originally  one  viz.  air  or  vapour.  This  theory  must  be  very  old, 
for  it  is  already  alludod  to  in  the  Liki,  and  the  Taoist  philosopher 
Lieh  Tse  of  tl"、  5th  cent,  h.c,  wlio  gives  the  best  exposition  of  it. 
seems  to  refer  it  to  the  sages  of  former  times.  The  passage  is  so 
interesting,  that  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote  it  in  full: ― 

" The  readier  Lxeh  Tse  said:— The  sages  of  old  held  tliat  tlie 
Yong  and  the  Y"'  govern  heaven  and  earth.  Now,  form  being 
born  out  of  tlie  formless,  from  what  do  lieaven  and  earth  take 
their  origin?  It  is  said:— There  was  a  great  evolution,  a  great 
inception,  a  great  beginning,  aiul  a  great  homogeneity.  During 
the  groat  evolution,  Vapours  were  still  imperceptible,  in  the  great 
inception  Vapours  originate,  in  the  great  b— uiiiig  Forms  appear, 
and  (luring  the  great  homogeneity  Substances  are  produced." 

" The  state  when  Vapours,  Forms,  and  Substances  though 
existing  were  still  undivided,  is  called  Chaos,  wliich  designates 
the  conglomeration  an<l  iuseparabilitv  of  things.  '  They  could  not 
be  seen  though  looked  at.  iiQt  be  heard  though  listened  to.  and 
not  be  attained  though  grasped  at,'  tliorefore  one  speaks  of  (incessant) 
evolution.    Evolution  is  not  bound  to  any  forms  or  limits." 

" Evolution  in  its  transformations  produces  one,  the  changes 
of  one  produce  seven,  the  changes  of  seven  produce  nine.  Nine 
is  the  climax,  it  changes  again,  and  becomes  one.  With  one  forms 
begin  to  change." 

" The  pure  and  light  matter  becomes  the  heaven  above,  the 
turbid  and  hoavy  matter  forms  the  earth  below.  Tli"  mixture 
of  their  fluids  gives  birth  to  man.  and  tlie  vitalizing  principle  of 
heaven  and  earth  creates  all  beings  "  (Lieh  Tse  I，  2). 

In  the  Liki  we  read: ― "  Propriety  must  have  sprung  from 
the  Oreat  One.  This  by  division  became  Heaven  and  Earth,  and 
by  transformation  the  Yin  and  the  Yamj "  ( Legged  Liki,  Vol.  1, 
p:  386). 


Digitized  by  Google 


16 


Lun  -  lUng :  Introduction. 


It  is  curious  to  note  the  similarity  of  the  Epicurean  cosmogony 
with  that  of  the  ancient  Chinese.    Lucretius  sings: ― 

" Quippe  etenim  primum  terrai  corpora  quseque, 
pro{)terea  quod  eratit  gravia  et  perplexa,  coihant 
in  medio  atque  ima^  capiebant  omnia  sedes; 
(|U<e  qunnto  magis  inter  se  perplexa  coibant, 
tani  ma^Ls  expressere  ea  quw  mare  sidera  solem 
lunamque  efficerent  et  magni  mcpnia  mundi : 
omnia  enim  magis  hsec  e  levibus  atque  rotundls 
seminibus  multoque  minoribu'  sunt  dementis 
quam  tellus,  ideo,  per  rara  foramina,  teme 
partibus  erumpens  primus  sc  sustulit  aether 
ignifer  et  inultos  secum  levis  abstulit  ignis." 

and  further  on: ― 

" Sic  igitur  terne  concreto  corpore  pondus 
ennstitit.  atque  omnis  mundi  quasi  liimis  in  imuni 
contluxit  gravis       suhscdit  funditns  ut  fa-x  ； 
inde  inare.  hide  aer,  intle  a_'th«'r  ignil'er  ipse 
cor|)oribus  liquidis  $unt  omnia  puru  relicta 
ft  leviora  aliis  alia,  et  lii(iiidissimus  a'thi'r 
ati|iie  lcvissiinus  aerias  super  inilnit  annus, 
m'c  lMpiidum  corpus  turhnntihiis  aeris  nuris 
commisoet." 

(Lucr.  V，  439-449；  485-493.) 


The  principle  of  division  is  (he  same: ― the  light  primary 
bodies  Wang  Ch  nng  ami  the  Chinese  cosinogonists  terra  Ynnt/%  the 
heavy  ont's  they  d«»signate  by  Vin.  Only  in  respent  of*  tlie  line  of 
dpinan^ation  the  Kpicureans  and  the  OiiiH'SO 山 l!Vr，  for,  wheroas 
the  former  regard  eartli  alone  as  l>cavy  water,  air  and  etlit*r 
as  light  matter,  the  Cliinese  comprise  earth  and  water  under  the 
term  Yin,  and  air  and  fiery  etlier  imdor  Y<m<j.  From  various  utter- 
ances of  Wang  Vh  nng  it  would  appear  that  lie  conceives  tlic  Yang 
as  u  fiery  and  tlie  Yht  as  a  waterv  clement,  in  short  that  Yamj  is 
fire  and  Yin  water.  This  would  tolerably  well  account  for  tlie 
formation  of  tlie.  universe.  Fire  forms  tlie  sun,  the  moon,  and  tlie 
other  iuminaries  of  Hoaven,  wliilo  from  water  and  its  sodimonts 
Kartli.  thr  oceans,  and  the  atniosplicrr  are  developed.  "  Tlie  solar 
fluid  is  identical  witli  the  heavenly  fluid  "  (('hap.  XVI11),  says  Wanf/ 
Ch  nug.  aixl :— lk  Rain  is  Yin,  and  brightness  Yang,  an<l  convorselv 
cold  is  Yin.  and  warmth  is  Yang     ((^liap.  XXI). 

The  olher  attributes  given  by  Wang  Ch' imy  to  the  Yang  and 
- the  Yin  principles  air  merely  tin1  ijualitit's  of  lir<、  aud  water.  The 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Wang  rh'iing  s  Philosophy. 


17 


Ynng,  tlio  fiery  etlier  or  tlic  solar  fluid,  is  bright,  i  e.  light  (('hap.  XX). 
warm  (Chap.  XXI).  dry  (Chap.  XVIII),  vivifying,  and  creative 
(Cliap.  XXI).  The  )'*//.  rain  or  water,  is  dark,  cold,  wet,  and 
dest motive  (p.  111).  By  itself  water  possesses  neither  light  nor 
、varmth，  and  may  well  be  called  dark  and  cold. 

There  is  not  a  strict  separation  of  the  fluids  of  Heaven  and 
Karth,  they  often  mix  and  permeate  one  another.  Heaven  as  well 
as  Earth  enclose  air  (Chap.  XIX).  The  immense  mass  of  air  forming 
the  gaseous  part  of  Heaven,  、vl"di,  as  we  have  seen,  is  credited 
with  a  body,  is  called  sky  (p.  113). 

Now,  whereas  Karth  rests  motionless  in  tlie  centre  of  the 
world ,  Heaven  revolves  around  it,  turning  from  east  to  west. 
This  rnovi'iiieiit  is  explained  as  tlie  emission  of  the  lieavenly  fluid 
which,  however,  takes  place  spontaneously.  Spontaneity  is  another 
rorner-stone  of  Wang  (  li  ung's  system.  It  means  that  this  move- 
ment is  not  governed  by  any  intelligence  or  subservient  to  the 
purposes  of  any  spiri/us  rector,  but  is  solely  regulated  by  its  own 
inherent  natural  laws.  The  same  idea  is  expirsscd  in  Mddhavdcharyn 
Sarca-Uarsana  Sangraha  ： 

"The  fire  is  hot,  the  water  cold,  refreshing  cool  the  breeze  of  morn. 
By  whom  came  this  variety?  Yymw  their  <i\vn  nature  was  it  born." 

(Sarva- Dartana-Samgraha,  translated  l»y  K.  B,  ('otrtU  and  A.  E.  (iough, 

London  1882,  -p.  10.) 

Wang  Ch  ung  admits  that  he  lias  adoj)ted  the  principle  of 
spontaneity  from  tlic  Taoists,  who  however,  have  not  sufficiently 
substantiated  it  by  proofs  ([k  97).  He  shows  that  Heaven  cannot 
display  a  couscious  activity  like  man,  because  such  activity  is 
evoked  by  desires  and  impulses,"  which  require  organs:— the  eye, 
the  mouth,  etc.  The  heavenly  fluid  is  not  a  human  body  with 
eyes  and  ears,  but  a  formless  and  insensible  mass  (p.  93).  The 
observation  of  the  natural  growth  of  plants  and  of  the  regularity 
of  other  natural  phenomena  prediuling  the  idea  of  special  designed 
arts,  has  confirmed  our  philosopher  in  his  belief  in  spontaneity. 
" The  principle  of  Heaven  is  inaction,"  he  says.  "  Accordingly  in 
spring  it  does  not  do  the  germiuating,  in  suinjucr  the  growing, 
in  autumn  t!ie  ripening,  or  in  winter  tlie  hkl'm^  of  the.  seeds. 
Wlien  the  Ya"g  fluid  comes  forth  spontaneously,  plants  will  ger- 
minate and  grow  of  themselves  and,  wlion  the  Yin  fluid  rises,  they 
ripen  and  disappear  of  their  own  accord  "  (p.  99). 

The  movement  of  the    Yin   fluid   is  spontaneous  likewise. 
" Heaven  aud  Eartli  ,'aiinot  act,  nor  do  thry  |>osscss  any  know- 

l.uii  •  lliug.  U 

Digitized  by  Google 


18 


Lun-Heng:  Introduction. 


ledge "  (p.  101).  They  are  not  inert,  but  their  activity  is  uninten- 
tional and  purposeless.    Thus  spontaneity  is  the  law  of  nature. 

From  this  point  of  view  Wtwg  (Itung  characterises  the  fluid  of 
Heaven  as  "  placid,  tr<nn(}uil,  desireli'ss.  inactivt',  and  unbusied "  (p. 
93),  all  attributes  ascribed  by  the  Taoists  to  their  Mundane  Soul,  Tno. 

At  all  times  Heaven  lias  been  personified  and  deified.  With 
the  Chinese  as  well  as  with  us  Heaven  lias  be«;ome  a  synonym 
for  God.  Wang  Ch  ung  notices  that  liuinan  qualities  liavo  been 
attributed  to  liim.  We  see  in  liim  the  Father  of  Mankind,  the 
Chinese  an  emperor,  the  "  Suj^reino  Ruler,"  Shmig  77.  lit'  lives  in 
heaven  like  a  king  in  his  palace,  ami  governs  tlie  world  (rhap.  XXII) 
meting  out  rewards  and  punishments  to  mankind,  rewarding  tlie 
virtuous  (p.  160).  and  punishing  the  wicked  (p.  1(;4).  He  n-primands 
the  sovereigns  ou  earth  for  their  misrulf  by  means  of  oxtraordinarv 
natural  phononirna.  and,  unless  they  reform,  visits  tliem  and  tlicir 
people  with  misfortune  (p.  12b').  Thuudpr  is  his  angry  voii'«、，  ;nul 
with  his  tlmntlerbolt  ho  strikes  tlio  guilty  (Cluip.  XXII). 

Regarding  Henv<Mi  as  nothing  else  than  a  substance,  a  pure 
and  tenuous  fluid  without  a  mind,  Wnug  (It  ung  cannot  but  reject 
these  anthropomorphisms.  Heaven  has  no  mouth,  no  eyes:  it 
does  not  speak  nor  act  (p.  183),  it  is  not  aflVctwl  hy  men  (|>.  1 10), 
does  not  listen  to  their  prayers  (p.  113),  and  docs  not  reply  to  the 
questions  addressed  to  it  (p.  184). 

By  a  fusion  of  the  fluids  of  Heaven  and  Kartli  all  the  organ- 
isms on  earth  have  been  produced  (p.  104).  Man  docs  not  make  an 
exception.  In  this  respe t  Iloaven  and  Earth  are  like  husband  arid 
wife,  and  can  be  r,'g:',rd('d  as  the  father  and  tlie  mother  of  man- 
kind (Chap.  XX).  Tlu'  same  idea  has  been  enunciated  hy  Lucret"": 一 

" I'osti  enio  pereunt  imhres.  ubi  «os  pater  etther 
in  premium  matrix  terrai  prweipitavit : 
at  nitid;c  stirgunt  frtigrs.  rnmiqiif11  virescunt 
arboi'iliiis.  crescunt  ipsa1  fetmjue  gravantur." 

(Lucr.  I,  250-253.) 

aiul  further  on: ― 

Dcnique  c.nplesti  sumus  onmes  semine  oriundi: 
omnihiis  ille  idem  j inter  est,  mule  alma  li(|iientis 
ntnoris  guttas  mater  <、'mi  terra  recepit. 
feta  [>arit  nitidas  fruges  arl>usta(|iie  l?etfl, 
et  genus  humantim  parit.  omnia  sa'cula  f era  rum, 
|>«ilntl.i  on m  prophet,  (piibiis  《>innes  corpora  pascunt 
et  diilcem  ducunt  vitani  proleiiK|iie  proj>agant; 
•  (iiaprojuer  merito  inaternum  nomeu  adeptast." 

(Lucr.  U,  988-995.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  rii'ung's  Philosophy. 


19 


Wang  Ch' ung  compares  the  creation  of  man  to  the  freezing 
of  ice.  He  is  the  produce  of  the  mixture  and  concretion  or  cry- 
stallization of  the  two  primary  fluids:— 44  During  the  chilly  winter 
mouths  the  cold  air  prevails,  and  water  turns  into  ice.  At  tho 
approach  of  spring,  the  air  bocomes  warm,  and  the  ice  melts  to 
water  Man  is  born  in  the  universe,  as  ice  is  produced  so  to 
speak.  The  Yang  antl  the  Tm  iluids  crystallize,  and  produce  man. 
When  Ins  years  arc  completed,  and  his  span  of  life  comes  to  its 
end,  he  dies  and  reverts  to  those  fluids  "  p.  196). 

The  Yin  forms  tlto  body,  ami  the  Yang  produces  the  vital 
spirit  and  the  mind.  Hoth  arc  identical,  Wang  C/iung  does  not 
discriminate  between  tlie  tntima  and  the  animus ： ― "That  by  which 
man  is  born  are  the  Yotig  and  the  V7/i  fluids;  tlu*  Yin  fluid  produces 
his  bones  and  flesh,  tlie  Ynug  fluid  the  vital  spirit.  While  mat)  is 
alive,  the  Yang  and  Yin  fluids  are  in  order.  Hcnre  bones  and  flcsli 
are  strontr,  and  the  vital  force  is  full  of  vigour.  Through  the  vital 
force  h,、  has  knowlcdj^i',  and  with  his  bones  and  flesh  he  displays 
strength.  The  vital  spirit  can  speak,  the  body  continues  strong 
and  robust.  "While  bones  and  flesh  and  the  vital  spirit  are  entwined 
and  linked  together,  they  are  always  visible  and  do  not  perish" 
(Chap.  XVIII). 

Man  is  imbued  with  the  heavenly  or  vital  fluid  at  his  birtli. 
It  is  a  formless  mass  like  the  yolk  of  an  t*gg,  before  it  is  hatched, 
showing  in  this  respect  tlie  nature  of  th<-  primop;enial  vapours,  from 
\vl»ich  it  has  been  derived  (p.  199).  Tlicrc  is  no  tliflerence  between 
tlie  vital  forces  of  man  and  animals.  They  liavc  the  same  origin. 
Tlie  vital  fluid  resides  in  the  blood  and  the  arteries,  and  is  nour- 
ished and  developed  by  eating  and  drinking  (p.  194).  It  lias  to 
fulfil  two  difficult  functions,  to  animate  the  body  and  keep  it  alive, 
antl  to  form  its  mind.  All  sensations  are  caused  by  the  vital 
fluid: ― "When  the  vital  fluid  is  thinking  or  meditating,  it  Hows 
into  the  eyes,  tlie  mouth  or  the  cars.  Wlien  it  flows  into  the 
«'vt's，  the  eyes  see  sliapes,  "lien  it  flows  into  tlie  ears,  the  ears 
hoav  sounds,  and,  when  it  flows  into  tlie  mouth,  the  mouth  speaks 
something  "  (Chap.  XVIII).  Wang  Ch  ung  imagines  that  all  sensations 
are  produced  in  (heir  organs  by  tlie  vital  fluid,  wlii (！ h  must  be  the 
mental  power  as  well,  since  it  thinks  :uid  meditates.  Insanity  is 
(k fined  as  a  disturbance  of  tin*  vital  force  (eod.).  Tlien'  are  no 
supernatural  mental  faculties  and  no  prophets  or  saj;es  knowing 
tlie  future  or  possessing  a  s|>et*ial  knowledge  derived  from  any 
other  source  than  the  viral  force  (p.  HI).  It  is  also  the  will,  which 
causes  the  mouth  to  speak.    As  such  it  determines  the  char:"'"'" 

a* 


21) 


Lun-Hfng:  Introduction. 


which  in  Wang  CIi  unt/  ^  belief  depends  upon  its  quantity  (Chap.  XXXI). 
As  vital  energy  it  modifies  the  length  of  human  life,  which  ceases, 
as  soon  as  this  eiu-ruy  is  used  up  (Chap.  XX VII). 

From  what  our  author  savs  about  gliosts  and  spirits  in  parti- 
cular, wliicli  consist  of  tl>e  Yantf  fluid  alono  without  any  Yin,  we 
can  infer  that  he  conceived  oi'  tlu*  lium:in  soul  also  as  an  aura,  a 
warm  breath  identical  to  ;i  certain  rxtent  wifli  tlie  solar  fluid. 

It  is  easy  to  see,  liow  tlie  Cliiuese  came  to  denote  tlic  body 
as  Yin  and  the  soul  as  yTang~l  bcliov*'  that  these  notions  wore  al- 
ready current  at  Wang  Ch  ung  s  time.'  who  only  took  f  hem  up.  l  lu* 
body  is  formed  of  a  much  coarstT  stuff  than  th<i  soul,  consisting 
as  it  does  of  solid  and  liquid  matter.  Tliert'fon*  tliey  presunx1 
that  it  must  have  been  protlm^'d  from  flic  heavier  ； md  growr 
substance,  the  Yin,  w liile  tl"'  [Hirer  nud  liijlitcr  Yang  fornird  tin* 
soul.  A  living  body  is  warm,  Avarmtli  is  a  tjuality  of  tlu*  Yaug 
fluid,  consequently  tlu*  vital  forci*  must  be  Yany.  Tlw  mind  rn- 
li^litrns  tlie  bofly,  the  Yang  fluid  is  Ii«>!it  :，s  well,  ergo  the  mind 
is  the  Yang  llnid.  The  last  coiu'lusion  is  not  rorn'ct.  tli<'  mind  not 
being  a  material  lijilit,  lmt  a  ('hincsc  would  not  liositatt-  to  usr 
sucli  an  analogy:  tliHr  philosopliv  abounds  with  such  symbolism. 

The  ideas  of  the  Kpicuroans  on  the  nature  of  the  soul  airn-e 
very  well  with  Wang  Ch  ung's  viows.  Acconlinp;  to  K/>intru,s  tl»,' 
soul  is  a  tenuous  substance  resembling  a  breath  with  an  admixture 
of  some  warmth,  dispersed  tliron^h  thr  whole  organism:— 小' 'x;j 
jwfta  leu  Xf/TTOfjifpsi;.  rrao  oXcv  rc  ai-coic-jua  7rapiC7za:u{\cv.  t:coci\i^CzC- 
raTOv  d\  ^vftSjuart  ^pjxo-"-  nva  xpacriv  iyo\<n  {Diog.  Laert.  X,  GH). 

Elsewhere  th«-  soul  is  fl escribed  a.s  a  mixtiin*  of  four  sub- 
Htanoes:  a  lirry.  an  ;ienTorm.  a  pucuniatiral,  and  a  nameloss  o",'， 
which  latter  is  said  to  canst'  sensations: ― y.pajiu  lx 卩 rra'p'v.  W.  ,tcic" 
.T::p'i'ccT;.  ly.  <Totc"  aicriovc,.  ix  zctcu  nvivfiariy.cv.  ix  rtraprov  nvc;  «xa- 
Tcvofxaarc^  (Mitt.  P/ac.  IV,  3). 

Lucretius  says  tliat  th<、  soul  consists  of  linich  finer  atoms  than 
those  of  water,  mist  or  smoke,  and  that  it  is  produced,  gro、vs，  aixl 
a<fes  tfi^'ther  \\  itli  the  body  ( Liter.  III.  425-427,  444-445).  \V  hen 
a  man  dies,  a  fine,  warm,  aura  loaves  his  body  (111.  232). 

As  regards  man's  position  in  nature  Wang  ( '/i  itn</  asserts  that 
lie  is  the  noblest  arid  most  intelligent  rrrature,  in  ^liich  tlie  miiul 
of  Hon  veil  and  Eartli  ivarli  tlh'ir  liiijliest  development  (("hap.  XL1II) ； 
still  he  is  a  rmitur''  like  others,  and  thvrc  exists  no  fimdaiuentiil 
(lillereiu'c  b"t 、、- *'，'n  liim  and  other  animals  (p.  202).  Wang  ( '//  umj 
likes  to  insist  upon  tlie  i"ti、r  insi»iiiliL'ancc  of  man,  when  (，oiu- 
|i;inMl  wit! i  tlie  imun  iisc  gnuuleuf  of  Heaven  and  Kartli.    It  seems 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch'iutg's  Philosophy. 


21 


to  have  given  him  some  satisfaction  to  pul  tuen,  who  an*  living 
on  Earth,  on  a  level  with  fleas  and  li«u、  feeding  upon  the  human 
body,  for  we  find  tliis  drastic,  simile,  which  cannot  have  failed 
to  hurt  the  feelings  of  many  of  his  self-sufficient  countrymen,  repeated 
several  times  (p.  183,  C  hap.  XXVI).  In  sliort,  according  to  Wang 
C/i  iiiuj  man  does  not  occupy  the  exceptional  position  in  the  world 
wliich  Ik*  uses  to  vindicate  for  liiuiseH*  He  has  not  been  created 
on  }>urposc,  as  nothing  else  has,  the  principle  of  nature  being 
cliance  and  spontaneity  (p.  103).  The  world  has  not  been  <;reatt'd 
i'or  tlie  sake  of  man.  "  Some  people,"  remarks  Wang  Cli  ung,  "  are  of 
opinion  that  Heaven  produces  grain  for  the  purpose  of  feeding 
mankind,  and  silk  and  hemp  to  clothe  tliem.  That  would  be 
tantamount  to  makiug  Ht'avcn  the  farmer  of  man  or  his  mulberry 
gitl,  it.  would  not  be  in  accordance  with  spontaneity  "  (p.  92).  As 
an  argument  against  the  common  belief  that  Heaveu  produ (！ es  liis 
creatures  on  purpose,  lie  addiKtes  the  struggle  for  existence,  for 
says  Wmtff  Ui  ung:—"  If  Heaven  had  prodiuvd  its  creatures  on 
purpose,  he  ought  to  liavi*  taught  tliem  to  love  each  other,  and 
not  to  prey  upon  aucl  destroy  one  another.  One  might  object  that 
such  is  tlie  nature  of  the  Hve  elements  tliat,  w  hon  Iloaven  creates 
all  tilings,  it  imbues  thoin  with  the  fluids  oi'  tlu*  live  elements, 
and  that  these  fight  togrtlx-r  iind  destroy  out'  another.  Iiut  then 
Heaven  ought  to  have  filled  its  creatures  with  tlu*  Huid  of  one 
eleinent  only,  and  tau^lit  tliem  mutual  lovo,  not  pennitting  the  fluids 
oi'  the  five  elomonts  to  resort  to  strife  ami  mutual  destruction  "  (p.  104). 

Here  again  Wmig  C/i  umj  is  in  perfect  accord  witli  the  Epi- 
cureans. Epicurus  asserts  that  nothing  could  be  more  preposterous 
than  the  idea  thur  nature  lias  been  regulated  with  a  view  to  the 
well-being  ol'  matikind  or  with  any  [nirposo  at  nil.  The  world  is 
not  as  it  ought  to  be,  if  it  liad  hven  (M-oated  for  the  sake  of  man, 
lor  how  could  Providence  pi'odm'"  a  world  so  lull  oi'  evil,  where 
the  virtuous  so  ol'ten  arc  maltreated  and  the  wicked  triumph? 
{ZeUer,  Philosophie  tier  (；  rit'ek'n,  HI.  Toil,  1.  Abt.,  1880,  pp.  398 
scq.  and  428.) 

The  same  sentiniont  fiiuls  expression  in  tlie  following  verses 
of  the  Epicurean  poet  ： ― 

*  "  Nam  quamvis  n'ruin  igtn»rem  primurdia  quse  sint, 

hoc  lanicn  ex  ipsis  caili  rationibus  ausim 
coiitinnare  aliistjin*  ex  rebus  reddere  multis, 
nequaquatii  nobis  divinitus  osse  creatam 
naturam  mimdi:  tanta  stat  prsedita  culpa." 

{Lucr.  U,  177  1S1  and  V,  185-189.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


22 


Lnn-Hcng:  Introduction. 


Although  man  owes  liis  existence  to  the  )nnff  and  tin*  Yin  <1  uids, 
ns  we  have  seen,  he  is  naturally  born  by  propagation  from  liis 
own  spciries.  Heaven  does  nol  sjiecially  come  down  to  generate 
}iim.  All  the  stories  of  suj)ernatural  birtlis  m,ur(le(l  iu  the  ('lassies, 
wliere  women  were  specially  fecuiidated  by  the  Spirit  of  Heaven, 
arc  inventions  (p.  48).  Hum  an  life  lasts  a  certain  time,  a  hundred 
years  at  most,  then  man  dies  (p.  4t>).  A  prolongation  of  lite  is 
impossible,  and  man  cannot  obtain  immortality  (p.  50): 一 "  01*  all 
the  beings  witli  blood  in  their  veins,  says  our  pliilosoplier,  tliere 
are  none  but  are  born,  aud  of  those  endowed  with  life  there  are 
none  but  die.  From  the  fact  that  they  were  born,  one  knows  tliat 
they  must  die.  Ilfavcn  and  Eartli  were  not  born,  tlierelore  tl"'y 
do  not  die.  Deatli  is  the  itorrelate  of  birth,  and  birth  tlje  counter- 
part of  dea  tli.  Tliat  whirh  It  us  a  beginning  must  have  an 
and  that  wliicli  lias  an  must  necrssarily  liavc  a  beginning. 

Only  that  wliich  is  without  begiiuiing  or  end,  lives  for  ever  aixl 
uever  dies  "  (Chap.  XXV1I1). 

To  show  that  the  luimaii  soul  is  not  innnortal  and  does  not 
possess  any  personal  cxistcm^e  after  death  Wnny  L'h  ung  reasons  :is 
lollows: —— During  life  the  Y""y  fluid,  /'.  <'.  the  vital  spirit  or  tin'  soul, 
adheres  to  the  body,  by  death  it  is  dispcreed  and  lost.  Hy  its 
own  nature  this  tluid  is  neither  conscious,  nor  intoHi^ent,  it  lias  no 
will  and  dors  not  act,  for  ttw  principk'  of  the  Yamj  or  the  lieavcnly 
fluid  is  uiicon»<'iousne8S,  inaction,  and  s[>otitutu*it y.  Hut  it  ac(juiivs 
mental  faculties  and  IxH'oincs  a  soul  by  its  temporary  connection 
witli  a  body.  The  body  is  tin-  neressary  substratum  of  intelligeucr, 
just  as  a  Hrc  requires  u  substanite  to  burn.  Iiy  death  "  that  which 
liarlunirs  intelligence  is  <lt»stroyed,  und  that  \vlii(tli  is  called  in- 
telligenco  disappears.  The  body  requires  the  tluid  for  its  iiiainten- 
ance,  unci  the  fluid  the  body  to  bt'comc  conscious.  Tlu'ri、  is  no 
fire  in  the  world  burniiig  quite  of  itscli,  how  could  there  be  an 
ohsc'iicc  without  a  body,  but  conscious  of  ilsclf  "  (p.  195).  Tlie  state 
of  the  soul  afttT  deatli  is  the  same  as  tliat  boibri"  birth.  "  Hi- lore 
their  birth  men  have  no  consciousness.  Hefore  tlu*y  are  born,  they 
form  part  of  tlio  priiuogcnial  fluid,  and  when  (I icy  die,  they  revt'iM 
to  it.  This  pi'im,'gtn"al  lluid  is  va^ue  and  《1"1W、  and  the  liunian 
fluid  a  part  of  it.  Anterior  to  his  birth,  man  is  (U-void  of  con- 
sciousness, and  at  his  death  lie  ivturns  to  this  original  state  oi" 
unconsciousiu'ss,  lor  how  should  he  be  conscious?  "   (p.  194.) 

Want/  Ch  ung  puts  forward  a  number  of  arguments  against 
immortality.  If  there  were  spirits  oi'  the  dt-ad,  they  would  (UTtainlv 
inunirt'sl  tliciii.sclvt's.     Vhcy  m'ver  do,  r<msc(jurntly  th«'re  arc  uoiu- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch  ung's  Philo8ophy. 


23 


(p.  193).  Other  animals  (lo  not  l)ec<unc  spirits  after  death,  whcre- 
forc  should  man  alone  be  immortal,  for  though  tlie  must  highly 
organised  creature,  still  he  is  a  creature  and  Wilis  under  the  general 
lawn  (p.  191).  The  vital  spirit  or  soul  is  affected  by  external  in- 
tluenoos,  it  grows  by  nourishment,  relaxes,  and  becomes  u "conscious 
by  sleep,  is  deranged  and  partly  destroyed  by  sickness,  and  the 
climax  of  sickness,  death,  which  dissolves  the  body,  should  not 
airect  it  at  all?  (p.  19(i.) 

At  all  times  the  dojjjma  of  immortality  has  bcon  negatived  by 
materialistic  plnlosopliers.  The  line  of  arguments  of  tlu*  Greek  as 
well  as  the  Indian  materialists  is  very  much  akin  to  that  of  Wamj  Ch  umj. 

Epicurus  maintains  that,  when  the  body  decays,  tlie  soul  be- 
comes scattered,  and  loses  its  faculties,  which  cannot  be  exercised  in 
default  of  a  body: ― xal  y.a)  viakvz\xivov  rev  cKc^  appo(a[iaTo;  巾" xr' 
duxc7THpirax  xcu  ovy.irt  ?xa  cn'  rac;  Oma/iuj  cvo\  xawai,  u'ar"  c:，'d，  aic^aiv 
•Ay.rr^ai.  ov  yap  oiov  re  vcuv  a','r—  aia?avc/miv/jv,  fir,  -v  tcvtw  tw  ovarr^azi 
xoli  rai;  xivrtasai  ravrai;  XW1","  c'rav  TCL  ^rsya'^vra  y.ai  mpiixcv'a  P;' 
rciavT   r;  of;  \vv  ova  a  ixn  "«1'reti;  如 i;  (  DUhj.  hurt.  X,  65-66). 

He  adds  that  an  iiniuaterial  essence  «an  neitlier  act  nor 
sulVcr,  and  that  it  is  foolish  to  say  that  the  s"ul  is  incorporeal:  — 
to  6\  Ktvov  cu-i  7roiijaai  ovn  zai^uv  dvvarai  ....。《'  )JyovTs;  acwfiaTcv  ftvou 
fiazat^ovaiv. 

From  the  fact  that  the  vital  fluid  is  horn  witli  tlie  body,  that 
it  grows,  develops,  and  deolincs  along  with  it,  Luctrtitui  infrrs  that 
the  (luid  must  also  bo  dissolved  simultaneously  witli  the  body, 
scattered  into  tin-  air  like  smoke: 一 

"ergo  disMtlvi  (pioqtie  convenit  umiuMii  anitnai 
naturnin,  ceil  fuinu.s,  in  altas  aeris  a  urns; 
(|uando«|iiidein  gi<;i)i  pari""'  pariterquc  vidt'miis 
crescere  et,  ut  docui,  siiuiil  jpvo  fessa  fatisci." 

(W.  111，  455-45H.) 

What  Wang  Cli  nuy  asserts  about  the  influcmv  of  sickness  on  the 
soul  (p.  196),  Lua-etiius  ex  presses  in  the  following  patlictic  verses: ― 

" Quin  etinm  morhis  in  corporis  avius  errat 
sjepe  aniiim.s:  dementit  enim  deliraqut*  l'atur, 
interduiiHjue  gravi  letliargo  lertur  in  altum 
aUernuiiHiue  .sopuretu  oculis  nutuque  caxlenti; 
mule  neque  exuudit  voces  nec  noscere  voltus 
illurum  jiotis  t*st,  ad  vitam  qui  revocantes 
circuin  slant  lacriinis  rornntes  ora  genuscjue, 
quare  aniiuuiu  <|uo(|uc  dussulvi  fateare  uec esses t, 
(juandoquidem  |.en«trant  in  eum  conta^ia  morbi." 

(Imct.  Ill,  4t>3-471.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


24 


Lun  -  Heng :  Introduction. 


Tlio  interaction  of  body  and  miud,  which  thrive  only,  as 
lung  as  tliey  are  joined  together,  and  both  decay,  when  they  have 
been  separated,  tl"'  poet  describes  as  follows: ― 

*'  Denique  corporis  atque  uniini  vivatn  potestas 
inter  se  c<iniuncta  valent  vitaqiie  fruiintur : 
nee  sine  corpore  enitn  viUilis  edere  tnotus 
sola  potest  animi  per  se  unttira  nec  an  tern 
cassum  animi  corpus  durare  et  sensibus  uti." 

(Lucr.  III，  Mt" 減） 

As  the  tree  does  not  grow  in  the  sky,  as  Gsh  do  not  live  on 
the  fields,  and  as  blood  does  not  ruu  in  wood,  thus  the  soul  catiuot 
reside  anywhere  else  tliau  in  th<'  body,  not  in  the  clods  of  eurtli, 
or  iu  the  lire  of  tlie  sun,  or  in  the  water,  or  in  the  air  (Lucr.  V， 
133-134)  and,  when  tlie  body  dies,  it  must  become  anuiliilated 
likewise. 

" Denique  in  aitlici  c.  mm  ai  hor,  non  a'quore  salso 
n' 山 ,'_s  esse  <iueiiiit,  nec  pisc«»,s  vivere  in  arvis, 
iipc  cruor  i"  ligiiis  netjue  sax  is  sucus  ines.se. 
certum  ac  (lisposiiumst  ulii  quicijuid  cre.scnt  et  itisit. 
sic  uniini  natura  tietiuit  sine  ct>rpt»re  oriri 
M>la  ne«jue  a  nervis  et  sanguine  longiter  esse." 

(JAlcr.  HI,  781-780.) 

" (juare,  corpus  ul"  interiit,  periisse  necessest 
ennfiteare  animuui  <listractnm  in  corjiore  (ot(>." 

(Loc.  cit.  79：>-7!>6.) 

Of  the  C/nircilkas  it  is  said  by  San  hint  that  "  seeing  no  soul, 
but  body,  they  maintain  tlie  non-existence  of  soul  other  tlian 
1)<)(1\'." ― "  Thought,  knowledge,  recollection,  etc.  perceptible  only 
where  organic  body  is,  are  projuTties  of  an  organized  frame,  not 
a|)partainin<r  to  exterior  substances,  or  oartli  and  <'tl"'r  oli'inents 
simple  or  aggregate,  unless  fonne<l  into  sim'Ii  a  fVauic." 

" While  tliore  is  body,  tluMe  is  tliow<>,lit,  and  sense  of  pleasuir 
and  pain,  none  when  body  is  not,  and  1"、",,"，  as  well  ;u>  from  soli- 
ronsciousness  it  is  concluded  tliat  self  and  body  are  identical." 
(//.  '/'•  ('"1,'hrok,',  Mis (； cllaneous  Essays,  vol.  II,  p.  428  seq.) 

The  dictum  that  everyone  is  the  child  of  lus  time  applies  to 
Wang  Ch' uny  also,  rrt»e-thinkf r  though  he  bf.  Y\o  lias  thrown  over 
board  a  great  many  popular  beliefs  and  superstitions,  but  lie  could 
not  get  ritl  of  all,  and  kec|)S  a  good 山': il.  His  veneration  of  anti- 
quity and  the  sagt's  of  old  is  not  unliniitcd.  but  it  exists  and  in- 
duces him  to  accept  many  of  their  idens,  w  liirh  liis  unbiasstHl 
«-i  iti<-al  gvuius  u  tniM  probably   liavc  rcjoctcd.     Like  the  majontv 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch  ung's  Pliilnsophy. 


25 


of  liis  countrymtMi 】ie  believes  in  Vnte  and  Prede.st'wntinn.  However, 
his  Fate  is  not  Providence,  for  lie  does  not  recognise  any  Superior 
Heiug  governing  the  、v')rl(l，  ami  it  has  been  considerably  raate- 
rialisod.  On  a  rather  vague  utterance  of  7:w  Jhia,  a  disciple  of 
(:oiifuci,"、  who  probably  never  thought  ("'the  interpretation  it  would 
receive  at  the  tiands  of  Wang  Cluing^  lie  builds  his  tlieory: ― "Life 
and  death  depend  on  Destiny,  wealtli  and  honour  come  from  Heaven  " 
(Analects  XII,  5).  The  destiny,  says  Wang  CK 、mg、  which  fixes  the 
duration  of  human  life,  is  the  heavenly  llnid,  i.  e.  the  vital  force, 
with  which  man  is  imbued  his  birth.  This  lluid  forms  his 
constitution.  It  can  bv  exubt'rant,  then  the  constitution  is  strong, 
and  life  lasts  long;  or  it  is  scanty,  then  tlif  body  becoiues  delicate, 
and  (leatli  ensue-s  early.  This  kind  ot  Fate  is  after  all  nothing  else 
than  the  bodily  constitution  (pp.  1  '.\S  and  46).  In  a  like  manm'r  is 
wealth  and  honour,  prosperity  ami  iinhappiness  transmitted  in  the 
stary  fluid,  with  w  hieh  men  are  likewise  tilled  at  their  birth.  "Just, 
as  Heaven  emits  its  fluid,  the  stars  send  forth  their  effluence, 
which  keeps  amidst  tlie  heavenly  lluid.  Imbibiug  this  fluid  men 
are  born,  and  live,  as  long  as  tl u*y  keep  it.  If  they  obtain  a  tine 
one,  tlwy  become  men  of  rank,  if  a  cominon  one,  common  people. 
Their  position  may  be  1  uglier  or  lower,  and  their  wealtli  bigger 
or  smaller"  (p.  138).  Consequently  tins  sort  ol'  Fate  deterininiug 
tlu*  amount  of  happiness  which  fulls  to  man's  share  during  his 
lii'c-tiiiie,  depends  on  tht*  star  or  the  stars  under  which  he  has 
been  born,  and  can  be  cnlculated  by  the  astrologers.  This  science 
was  flourishing  at  Mang  Ch  uiig's  time  ami  ol'ticially  recognised.  On 
all  important  occiisions  tlie  court  astrologers  were  consulted. 

Now,  Fate,  whctlier  it  be  tlir  result  of  the  vital  force  or  of 
the  starj'  iluid,  is  not  always  delinitive.  It  may  be  altered  or  '' 
moditiea" by  various  circuuistance.s.  urul  only  remaius  unchanged, 
if  it  be  stronger  than  all  antagonistic  forces.  As  a  rule  "  tlie 
destiny  rogulating  man's  life-time  i*  more  pmverf'il,  than  the  one 
presiding  over  his  prosperity  '•  (p.  137).  If  a  mau  dies  siuldi'iily, 
it  ia  of  no  use  tliut  the  stary  iluid  liud  still  much  happiness  in  storo  '-一 
for  him.  Moreover  "  the  destiny  of  a  State  is  stronger  than  that 
oi"  individuals  "  (loc.  cit.).  Many  persons  are  iuvolvod  in  tl"'  dis- 
aster ol'  tlieir  country,  who  by  Heaven  were  predeterniined  for  a 
long  and  prosperous  l"V'. 

The  ciicumstaiues  modifying  man's  original  fate  are  often 
denoted  as  'J，ii"f\  Hesitl«'s  Wmuj  C/i  mty  distinguisliea  ('oiiti  fides. 
Chances,  and  lucU/mtf>\  diilert'iit  nanK's  for  almost  the  sumo  idea 
(p.  142).    Those  incidents  may  be  happy  or  unhappy,  they  may 


Digitized  by  Google 


26 


Lun-Heiig:  Introduction 


tally  witli  tlic  original  destiny  or  disagree  witli  it,  rompletely 
change  it,  or  be  l't'pulsrcl.  If  an  innocent  Jiian  be  thrown  into  jail, 
but  is  released  again,  this  uulucky  conting«v»cy  was  powerless 
against  his  lavourablc  destiny;  whereas,  when  liuiulreds  or  thou- 
sands perish  to^ellu'r  in  a  catastrophe  "  the  disaster  they  uiet  with 
was  so  paramount  that  their  good  tate  and  thriving  luck  could  not 
ward  it  oil" "  {eod.). 

We  see  Wang  L'h  ung  s  Fate  is  not  the  inexorable  dotTec  of 
Heaven,  tlie  slfxapu'v^  of  tlie  Greeks,  the  dim  necessity ,  or  the 
patristic  predostination,  being  partly  natural  (vital  lluid),  partly 
supernatural  (stary  flui<l),  and  partly  chance. 

Epicurus  impugns  fatalism,  and  so  does  Ti  and  his  school 
on  the  ground  that  fatalism  paraly/»'s  human  ai-tivity  anil  is  sub- 
vert ive  of  morality.  There  were  scholars  at  Wang  (  It  itnys  time  who 
attempted  to  mitigate  the  rigid  fatalism  by  a  compromise  with  self- 
determination.  1'hey  distinguished  three  kiuds  of  destiny: ― the 
natural,  the  concomitant,  and  the  ath't'rst'.  Natural  destiny  is  a 
destiny  not  iuterfered  with  by  human  activity.  The  concomitant 
destiny  is  a  combination  of  destiny  and  activity  both  working  in 
rlie  same  direction,  either  for  the  good  or  for  the  bad  of  the 
individual,  whereas  in  the  a(lv«、rs«、  destiny  tlie  two  forces  work  in 
opposite  directions,  but  destiny  gets  the  upper  hand  (p.  138). 

Wang  (liung  repudiates  this  scholastic  distinction,  urging  that 
virtue  and  wisdom,  in  short  that  human  activity  has  no  influence 
whatever  ou  fate,  a  blind  force  sot  already  iu  motion  before  the  new- 
born begins  ")  act  (p.  141).  There  is  no  connection  and  no  harmony 
between  human  actions  and  fate.  Happiness  is  not  a  reward  lor 
virtue,  or  unhappiness  a  punishment  for  crimes.  Wang  Ch' ung  ad- 
duces abundance  oi'  instances  to  show,  liow  often  the  wise  and 
the  virtuous  are  miserable  and  tormented,  while  scoundrels  thrive 
and  flourish  (Chap.  XII).  Tlierd'ort*  a  wise  man  should  lead  a 
tranquil  and  quiet  life,  placidly  awaiting  his  fate,  and  enduring 
what  cannot  bo  changed  (p.  145). 

In  tlie  matter  of  Fate  Wang  Ch  ung  shares  all  the  common 
projutlices  of  Iiis  countrymen.  Fate,  he  thinks,  can  be  ascertained 
Ijv  mtroloyy  ami  it  cau  be  i'or«*s«M'n  from  pliy« iogu o tn it '.v,  "'〃"'".、',  dream.sy 
a ud  tijtjuirition.s  of  ghosts  and  spirits.  There  are  special  ^oi-dLmnt 
sciences  for  all  these  bran<:lies: ― iinthroposcopy,  diviuation,  oneiro- 
inancy,  neiToinancy,  etc. 

Anthroposi'opy  pretends  to  know  the  late  not  only  from  man's 
ft'atm'cs  and  the  lines  of  his  skin  (p.  47)，  but  also  from  the  osseous 
structure  of  ilie  body  and  particularly  from  bodily  abnormities 


igitized  by  Google 


Wang  Chung's  Philosophy.  27 

(Chap.  XXIV).  Many  such  instaruM's  liave  been  recorded  in  ancient 
Chinese  books.  Of  feat  urea  the  pliysiojirnouiists  used  to  distinguish 
70  (lirterent  clash's  (p.  72).  In  acconlauce  with  tliis  theory  Watiff 
Ch  ung  opines  that  the  vital  fluid,  the  bearrr  oi'  destiny,  linds  ex- 
pression in  tlie  lorms  and  features  of  the  body,  and  can  bo  read 
by  the  soothsayers.  He  remarks  that  a  person's  character  may 
likewise  be  determined  from  his  loatures,  but  that  no  regular  science 
for  this  purpose  has  been  developed  (Chap.  XXIV). 

Of  Omens  or  PorteuU  there  are  auspicious  and  inauspicious 
ones,  lucky  or  unlucky  auguries.  Freaks  of  nature,  aud  rare  speci- 
mens, soinetiiues  only  existing  in  imagination,  are  considered  auspi- 
cious e.  g.  sweet  dew  and  whw  .ipriuy.s  believed  to  appear  in  very 
propitious  times,  in  the  vegetable  kingdom: ― tlie  purple  holetm,  and 
auspicious  grass,  in  the  animal  kingdom :  — the  plinnU,  the  uukoni, 
the  dragon,  the  tortoise,  aud  other  l'abulous  animals  (p.  56).  Wang 
Ch  uiig  discourses  at  great  length  ou  the  nature  and  the  form  of 
these  auguries.  They  are  believed  to  be  forebodings  of  the  rise 
of  a  wise  emperor  or  of  the  birth  of  a  sage,  and  harbingers  of  a 
time  of  universal  peace.  Those  Sages  are  ot'tentiuies  distinguishable 
by  a  halo  or  an  aureole  above  their  heads.  The  Chinese  historical 
works  are  full  of  such  wonderful  signs.  Hut  all  these  omciiH  are 
by  no  means  intentionally  seat  by  Heaven,  nor  responses  to  ques- 
tions addressed  to  it  by  man.  They  iiappeu  spontaneously  and 
by  chance  (p.  I8(j),  simultaneously  with  those  lucky  events,  which 
they  are  believed  to  indicate.  There  exists,  as  it  were,  a  certain 
natural  harmony  between  human  life  and  the  forces  of  nature, 
manifested  by  those  omens. 

" Ihra'its,  says  Wang  Ch  any,  are  visions.  Wheu  good  or  bad 
luck  are  impending,  the  miud  sha}>es  these  visions "  (p.  215).  He 
aUo  declares  that  dreams  are  produced  by  the  vital  spirit  (p.  200), 
which  amounts  to  the  same,  for  the  mind  is  the  vital  fluid,  hi 

Wang  Cliuiig's  time  there  already  existed  the  theory  still  held  at 
present  by  many  Cliinese  that  during  a  dream  the  vital  spirit  leaves 
the  body,  and  communicates  with  the  outer  world,  and  that  it  is 
not  before  tlie  awakeuing  that  it  returns  into  the  spiritless  body. 

Waiuj  Ch'tmy  combats  this  view,  aliowiug  that  dreams  arc  images 
only,  which  have  no  reality.  lie  further  observes  that  there  are 
direct  and  indirect  dreams.  The  lonner  directly  show  a  future 
event,  the  latter  are  symbolical,  and  must  be  explained  by  the 
oneirocritics. 

Wang  Ch  nny  denies  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  but  at  the 
same  time  lio  bclirvcs  in  Ghosts  ;uul  Spirits.    His  ghosts,  however, 


Digitized  by  Google 


28 


t.un-IKng:  Introduction. 


are  very  poor  figures,  pliantoms  and  semblances  still  less  substantial 
than  the  Shades  of  Hades.  They  are  unembodied  apparitions,  have 
no  consciousness  (p.  li)4),  feel  neither  joy  nor  paiu,  and  can  cause 
neither  good  uor  evil  (Chap.  XLI1).  They  have  human  ^liape  or 
are  like  mist  and  smoke  (Cliap.  XL1 V).  The  origin  of  ghosts  aud 
spirits  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  otlier  manifestations  of  fate:  feat- 
ures, omens,  and  dreams,  namely  the  solar  fluid  and  tlie  vital  force 
or  Ynuy.  "  When  the  solar  fluid  is  powerful,  but  devoid  of  tlie  Yvi, 
it  can  merely  produce  a  semblance,  but  no  body.  Being  nothing 
but  the  vital  fluid  without  bones  or  flesh,  it  is  vague  and  diffuse, 
and  wlien  it  appears,  it  is  soon  extiuguished  again"  (Cliap.  XVIII). 

Cousetiuently  ghosts  and  spirits  possess  the  attributes  of  the 
solar  fluid: 一 "Tlie  fluid  of  fire  llickers  up  and  down,  and  so  phan- 
toms are  at  one  lime  visible,  and  another,  not.  A  dragon  is  an 
animal  resorting  from  tlie  Yang  principle,  thcrffore  it  can  always 
change.  A  ghost  is  the  Yaiuj  fluid,  therefore  it  uow  appears  and 
then  absconds.  The  Yany  fluid  is  red,  hence  the  ghosts  seen  by 
people,  have  all  uniform  crimson  colour.  Flying  demons  are  Yong^ 
which  is  fire.  Consequently  flying  demons  sliiue  like  fire.  Fire 
is  hot  and  burning,  hence  the  branches  and  leaves  of  trees,  on 
wbicli  these  demons  alight,  wither  and  die "  (eod.).  The  solar 
fluid  is  sometimes  poisonous,  therefore  a  ghost  beiug  burning  poison, 
may  (； ventually  kill  somebody  (Cliap.  XXIII). 

Many  other  theories  on  ghosts  were  current  at  Wang  Ch' ungs 
time,  one  of  、vl"(:li  very  well  agrees  with  liis  system,  to  wit  that 
in  many  cases  gliosis  are  visions  or  hallucinations  of  sick  people. 
Otliors  u  ere  of  opiuion  that  ghosts  an;  ajiparitions  of  tlie  lluid  of 
sickness,  some  held  tliat  they  are  tlie  essence  of  old  creatures. 
Another  idea  、vas  that  ghosts  originally  live  in  men,  and  at  their 
deaths  are  transformed,  or  that  tlicy  are  spiritual  beings  uot  much 
<litreren(  from  iuuu.  According  to  one  theory  tl"、y  would  be  the 
spirits  of  ryd"'al  si^ns  (Cliap.  XVI II). 

According  to  Wnuy  Ch  nny\s  idea  ghosts  and  s[)irits  are  only 
one  class  ol'  tlu*  many  wonders  and  mh'aclcs  happening  between 
l»ea  von  and  cuitli.  "  Bet  ween  heaven  and  earth,  he  says,  there 
are  many  wouders  in  words,  in  sound,  mul  in  writing.  Kitlicr  tlie 
miruiMiloiis  fluid  assumes  a  huin;in  shape,  or  a  man  has  it  in  1  n ni- 
sei 1",  and  |x'ii'onns  tlie  miracles.  The  gliosts,  wbicli  appear,  are  all 
apparitions  m  human  shape.  Men  iloiug  wonders  with  the  iluid 
in  them,  an*  .sorrerors.  Koal  sorcerers  liave  no  basis  ior  what  they 
say,  and  yet  their  lucky  or  unlucky  j)rophecies  fall  from  their  lips 
spontaneously  like  the  quaint  sayings  of  boys.    The  mouth  of  boys 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Cli  ling's  Phaosophy. 


29 


uttfrs  those  quaint  sayings  spontaneously,  ami  tho  idea  of  (heir 
oration  comes  to  wizards  spontaneously.  The  mouth  speaks  of 
itself,  and  the  idea  comes  of  itself.  Tlius  the  assumption  of  humau 
form  by  the  miracles,  and  their  sounds  are  spontaneous,  and  their 
words  coine  forth  of  their  ow n  accord.  It  is  the  same  thing  in 
both  cases  ，，  {Inc.  cit.).  The  miraculous  iluid  may  also  assume  the 
sliape  of  an  animal  like  the  iVireboding  the  doath  of  Duke 

/ h'unnj  of  Ch  i  (.««/.),  or  of  an  inatiimato  thing  like  the  yellow 
stone  into  、v】iioli  ( 'hang  L'utng  was  transformed  (Chaj).  XXX). 

b)  Physics. 

Wanff  VU' umj  docs  not  (liwriminat,'  brtwcfn  a  trans<-t'ti<l«Mital 
Henren  and  a  inarciial  Ski/.  IIj'  knows  but  <""'  solid  Hcavt-n  formed 
of  tln»  Yang  fluid  ami  lillrd  witli  air. 

This  Heaven  appi'ars  to  us  like  an  npturnoil  bow  I  or  a  i','diii- 
iiig  unibrt'lla,  but  that,  says  Wantj  C/i  nm/,  is  an  optica!  illusion 
oiuised  by  tlio  (li«ram'e.  Heaven  and  Karth  seem  to  be  joined  at 
the  horizon,  hut  ex|K、r"、mv  shows  us  that  tliat  is  not  tho  case. 
Wang  Ch'uiuj  holds  tliaf  Ileavon  is  as  level  as  Earth,  forming  a 
flat  plain  (ChnV.  XX). 

Heaven  turns  from  East  to  West  round  the  Polar  Star  as  a 
ceiitre.  currying  with  it  tlio  Sun,  the  M«x»u,  and  tht'  Stars.  T，"、 
Sun  and  the  Moon  have  their  own  inovcnu  tits  in  oj)|)«>sitf  dircrtion, 
from  West  to  Kast,  but  t hey  air  so  murlt  slower  than  that  of 
Ilfavcn,  that  it  rarrit's  them  alonjr  all  tlu*  s*am'>.  He  compaivs 
tljcir  movoiiu'iits  to  tlmst*  of  ants  crawling  on  a  rolling  inill-stoin* 
((('(I).  I  Halo  makes  Iloaveti  rofat<'  like  :i  hpindl"  Tlie  planets 
take  part  in  this  mmvim'nt.  of  Heaven,  hwt  at  the  same  time,  thougli 
more  slowly,  move  in  opposito  direction  by  menus  of  the  cq、。'v6，' 入" 
forming  the  whirl  {i'h'"'u，t'<j-fhhiz(\  (； osi'hii'liti1  (l,、r  Pliilosopliie, 
vol.  1，  p.  180). 

Heaven  makes  in  one  day  and  one  niuht  onr  complete  oiri'uin- 
volurion  of  365  (l*'gtv<>s.  One  doo-rce  】M'ing'  calculated  at  2,000  Li. 
the  distam-e  made  by  I-I,':ivt'n  »ivorv  24  hours  measures  7 HO, 000  Li. 
The  sun  pm'-mls  only  one  cleirreo  ---  2.000  Li,  tl"'  Moon  Ki  de- 
grees 26,000  Li.  Want/  C/i'untj  states  tliat  this  is  the  opinion 
of  tlie  Literati  (eod.).  ？ lea v»' u  s  movciiu  nt  appears  to  us  very 
slow,  o\vin«r  to  its  gn、at  distance  from  Eu ith.  la  reality  it  is  very 
last.  The  Cliincsr  inatluMiKiticians  have  conn»utf(l  tli«>  distance  at 
upwards  of  60,000  Li.  Tlu-  Taoist  jjliilosopher  llmti  .Win  7:、?'  ； ivci^ 
that  it  measures  50.000  I」 (Chap.  XIX). 


Digitized  by  Google 


30 


I-nu  -  Hriig :  Introduction. 


The  body  of  the  Earth  is  still  more  solid  than  that  of  Heaven 
and  produced  by  tlie  )7;j  fluid.  Whoreas  Heaven  is  in  constant 
motion,  the  Fartli  docs  not  move  (Chap.  XX).  It  mt'a.suros  1 0,000  mill- 
ion square  Li,  wliicli  would  be  more  tlinn  2,500  tnillion  s(|iiai'('-km.， 
and  lias  tin'  shape  of  a  rortan^ular,  e(jnilatcral  s(|iiar<\  which  is  of 
course  levi'l.  Wang  Cli  ung  arrives  at  these  figures  in  the  following 
Avay.  The  city  of  Lotjaufj  in  Hoimn  is  by  thv  Chinese  roganled  as 
the  centre  of  the  world  and  Ammin  or  Ji/i-nan  as  the  country  over 
which  the  sun  in  his  course  readies  tlio  southormost  point.  Anumn 
tlierefore  would  also  be  the  southern  limit  of  the  Earth.  The 
distance  between  Loifang  and  Atmam  is  10,000  Li.  Now,  Chinese 
、vho  liavt-  been  in  Annam  liave  reported  that  tl"'  sun  does  not 
reach  Ins  s<»utl)-point  tliere,  and  that  it  must  he  still  further  south. 
Wang  (Vnny  assumes  that  it  "liglit  l>e  1 0,000  Li  more  south.  Now 
Lot/ant/,  thougli  being  tlie  centre  of  the  known  world  '•.  e.  China, 
is  not  tlie  centre  of  the  Eartli.  The  rent  re  of  the  Earth  must  be 
beneath  the  Polar  Star,  the  centre  of  Heaven.  Wotxj  Ch'img  supposes 
the  distance  between  Loi/anff  and  the  centre  of  the  Earth  below 
tlie  pole  to  be  about  30,000 【丄  The  distance  from  tlie  centre  of 
the  Earth  to  its  southern  limit,  the  south-point  of  the  sun,  thus 
measuring  about  50,000  Li,  tlie  distance  from  the  centre  to  (he 
north- point  must  be  tlie  same.  That  would  give  1 00,000  Li  as  the 
length  of  tlie  Earth  from  north  to  south,  and  tin1  same  number 
can  ho  nssuinod  for  tlh'  distanr,、  from  rast  to  west  (Chap.  XIX). 

The  actual  world  (China)  lies  in  the  south-east  oi'  the  universe 
(Chap.  XX).  This  peculiar  idea  may  owe  its  origin  to  tlie  observation 
that  China  lies  south  of  tlx1  I'olar  Star,  the  oentrr  of  I  lea  von,  mid 
tliat  at  the  east-side  China  is  bordered  by  the  ocean,  wherras  in 
the  west  tlie  mainland  coutinues. 

Tsou  Yen,  a  scholar  of  the  4th  rent.  n.c.  has  propoiin<l«'(l  tho 
doctrine  that  there  arc  Nirit'  Continents,  all  surrounded  hy  minor 
seas,  and  that  China  is  Imt  om、  of  tl"'i"，  situated  in  tlio  south-cast. 
Beyond  tho  Nine  Conliiuuits  flier*'  is  slill  the  Great  Ocean.  Wanf/ 
Ch  uiKj  discredits  this  view,  boeause  neither  the  Great  Yn,  who  is 
believed  to  liave  ponol  rated  to  the  farthest  limits  of  the  Earth  and 
to  liave  written  down  liis  observations  in  tlie  Slinn-lmi-k'iiig,  nor 
Himi  San  T^e,  who  had  gn'at  scholars  and  oxperts  in  his  service, 
mention  .anything  ahout  (lillVmit  continents  (Chaj).  XIX). 

Tliis  Karth  is  high  in  the  Nortli-Wost  ;iml  low  in  tlie  Soutli- 
Kasf,  cons»M|Uontlv  the  rivers  flow  .  ;ist  wanls  into  the  (Cli<i|).  XX). 

This  remark  again  aj)|)lios  only  to  Cliina,  \v!ii«'h  from  the  table  land 
of  Central  Asia  slopos  dow  a  to  the  orcan,  wliero  all  hor  big  rivers  Umv. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wnng  Ph'ung's  Philosophy. 


31 


Among  the  celestial  bodies  the  Sun  is  tlie  most  important.  Ho 
is  a  star  like  the  Moon  and  the  Planets,  consisting  of  fire.  His 
diameter  has  been  found  to  measure  1 ,000  Li.  The  Sun  follows 
tlie  movement  of  Heaven,  but  hns  his  own  at  the  same  time.  The 
common  opinion  that  the  sun  and  the  other  stars  are  ro\nul  is 
erroneous.  They  only  appear  so  by  the  distance.  The  Sun  is 
fire,  but  fire  is  not  round.  The  meteors  that  havo  been  found, 
were  not  round.  Meteors  are  stars,  ergo  the  stars  are  not  round 
(loc.  cit.). 

At  noon,  、vlien  the  Sun  is  in  tlie  zenith,  he  is  nearer  to  us 
than  in  the  morning;  or  the  evening,  berause  the  perpendicular  line 
from  the  zenith  to  the  earth  is  shorter  tlian  tlie  oblique  lines, 
winch  must  b<*  drawn  at  sunrise  or  sunset.  It  is  for  this  rejison 
also  that  the  sun  is  hottest,  when  he  is  culminating.  That  tlie 
Sun  in  the  zenitli  appears  smaller  than,  when  he  rises  or  sets, 
whereas,  being  nearer  thrn,  lie  ought  to  be  l>i^er,  is  because  in 
bright  daylight  every  fire  appears  smaller  than  in  the  darkness  or 
at  dawn  (eod.). 

This  question  lias  already  been  broached  by  L'^h  Tsc  V,  0 
who  introduces  two  lads  dis|mting  about  it,  the  one  saving  that 
the  Sun  must  be  nearer  at  sunrise,  because  he  is  larger  tluMi,  the 
other  retorting  that  at  noon  he  is  hottest,  and  therefore  must  be 
nearest  at  noon.  Coufmim  is  called  upon  to  solve  the  problem, 
but  cannot  find  a  solution. 

Wang  Ch  ung  is  inucli  nearer  the  truth  than  t:}>k'H'，t-、  whose 
notorious  argument  on  t)ie  size  of  tlie  sun  and  the  moon,  is  not 
very  much  to  his  credit.  Tie  pretends  that  the  stars  must  bo 
about  the  size,  wliich  tliey  appear  to  us,  because  fires  did  not 
lose  anything  of  their  lieat,  or  their  size  by  the  distanre  ( Diog. 
Juoerf.  X,  91),  wliirh  is  an  evident  mis-statement.  Lucretius  repeats 
these  arguments  ( Liter .  V,  554-582). 

The  different  lengths  of  day  and  night  in  winter  and  summer 
Wang  (li  uny  attributes  to  the  shorter  and  longer  curves  described 
by  the  Sun  on  diflerent  days.  In  his  opinion  the  Sun  would  take 
16  different  courses  in  heaven  (Uirinp:  the  year.  Otlier  scholars 
speak  of  9  only  {eod.).  Wang  Ch' uug  is  、v,、ll  acquainted  with  the 
winter  and  summer  Solstices  and  the  vernal  and  autumnal  Equi- 
noxes (eod.). 

Whereas  the  Sun  consists  of  fiiv,  the  Moon  is  water.  Her 
apparent  roundness  is  an  illusion;  water  has  no  definite  shape 
{eod.).  Of  the  movement  of  the  Moon  we  have  already  spoken. 
In  Cliini'se  natural  philosophy  the  Moon  is  always  looked  upon  us 


Digitized  by  Google 


32 


Lun  -  Hrng:  Iiilro«lurtion. 


the  opposite  of  the  Sun.  The  Sun  1  km  112：  the  orb  of  day  and  light 
is  Yaiu/,  fire,  consequently  the  Moon,  tl»e  companion  of  nigljt  and 
<larkness,  must  lu1  Yin,  、vat,'r.  The  Sun  ap|)ours  brilliant  and  hot 
lik,*  a  hurnini;  fire,  the  Moon  pnlc  and  rool  like  glistening  wyter. 
Wlu»t  wondrr  tliat  tl"、  am-ient  Chinese  should  liave  taken  her  for 
real  water,  f<ir  Wang  ( 'U  umj  nuMcly  echoes  tlie  general  belief. 

I11  the  matter  of  EcHjfses  Want/  ('h、">g  does  not  fall  in  witli 
the  view  of  many  of  his  time,  to  o fleet  tliat  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon  ovor-sliadow  nnd  cover  one  another,  nor  with  another  theory 
explaining  thv  eclipses  by  the  proponderantT  <»f  cither  of  the  two 
fluids,  the  Yin  or  tli<*  Yong,  hut  holds  tliut  by  a  spontaneous  inove- 
iJU'nt  of  their  fluids  the  Sun  or  the  ^loon  shrink  for  a  while  to 
expand  attain,  when  tlie  eclipse  is  over.  He  notes  tliat  those 
rclipses  are  natural  and  regular  | 山 t'nmm'na,  and  tliat  on  an  average 
an  eclipse  of  the  Sun  occurs  t'vt'ry  41  or  42  months,  and  an  ecli|»st» 
of  the  Moon  every  180  days  (eod.). 

Kfticuncs  nnd  Lucrcdiis  are  lx>th  f»f  opinion  tlmt  the  fading  of 
the  Moon  may  !»«•  accounted  for  in  (lirtVirnt  ways,  and  tliat  there 
would  be  a  |>»>ssihilit y  that  the  M(、on  milly  dt'creases  i.  e.  shrinks 
together,  and  then  increases  again  ( Diog.  Lfiert.  X,  95:  Ltur.  V, 
719-724). 

Wong  ('Hung  is  a、vart'  (hat  ebb  and  high-tide  are  caused  by 
the  phases  of  tho  Moon,  and  that  the  famous  'k  Hore"  at  Hangchmi 
is  not  an  ebullition  of  the  Kiver,  resriitinir  the  crime  committed 
on  Wu  T.se  Ihii,  who  was  unjustly  dnnvnod  in  its  waters  (p.  48). 

Till'  ^tnrs  e\cej)t  the  Five  Planets,  wliicli  liavr  tlieir  proper 
inovemciit,  arc  fixed  to  Heaven,  and  turn  round  witli  it.  Their 
diameter  lias  been  ostiniatt'd  at  about  100  U  '/l0  of  the  diameter 
of  the  Sim.  That  they  do  nor  appear  bigfjor  to  us  than  eg^s  is 
tlu»  ellVrt  of  their  great  distaiuv  (Cl)ap.  XX).  TlieV  are  made 
of  the  same  subsfaiu'cs  as  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  nnd  the  various 
tilings,  and  not  of  stone  like  \\w  meteors.  They  omit  a  stronj; 
light.  The  Five  I'lanet.s ：— Voiius.  Jupiter,  Mercurv,  Mars,  and 
Saturn  consist,  of  the  essence  of  tlio  Five  Klrments:  — water,  fire, 
wood,  metal,  and  fartli.  The  fact  that  tho  Five  IMancts  air  in 
Chinese  named  a  ft  or  tlio  Five  Elements: ― The  Water  Star  (^Icrcury), 
the  Fin-  Star  (3Iars).  oir.  must  liavt*  led  Whikj  I'll  ttiuj  to  the  belief 
tlial  tliey  are  ju'tually  fonned  of  tl"'s('  elements.  Tli*'  languaa;p 
must  also  l>e  held  ri'sponsihlc  lor  anotlu-r  error  into  wliich  W'amj 
( 'h  ""！ j  lias  fallen.  He  seems  to  believe  tliat  the  stars  and  con- 
stcllalions  ； I  re  really  what  tlieir  (^liincse  names  express  e.  g..  that 
there  are   hundreds   oi'  oflicials  -  and   two  famous  i-harioteers  in 


igitized  by  Google 


Wang  Cli  ang's  Philosophy. 


33 


Heaven,  who  by  emitting  tlieir  fluid,  sliape  tlie  fate  of  men,  (p.  138) 
and  that  the  28  Solar  Mansions  are  actually  celestial  postal  stations 
(Chap.  XIX).  It  is  possible  however  tliat  tlie  intimations  of  Wang 
Ch  ung  to  tliis  effect  are  not  to  be  taken  literally,  and  that  he  only 
makes  use  of  the  usual  terminology  without  attaching  to  them  the 
meaning  wliich  his  words  would  seem  to  imply.  We  are  some- 
times at  a  loss  to  know,  whether  Wang  Ch  ung  speaks  his  mind  or 
not,  for  his  words  are  often  only  rhetorical  and  dialectical  devices 
to  meet  tlie  objections  of  his  opponents. 

Wang  Ch  ung's  ideas  on  Meteors  and  Shooting  Stars  are  cliiefly 
derived  from  some  classical  texts.  He  comes  to  tlie  conclusion  that 
such  falling  stars  are  not  real  stars,  nor  stones,  but  rain-like  phe- 
nomena resembling  the  falling  of  stare  (Clmp.  XX). 

Hain  is  not  produced  by  Heaven,  and,  properly  speaking,  does 
not  fall  down  from  it.  It  is  the  moisture  of  earth,  wliicli  rises 
as  mist  and  clouds,  and  tlien  falls  down  agaiu.  The  clouds  and 
the  fog  condense,  and  in  summer  become  Rain  and  Detr,  in  winter 
Snow  aud  Frost  (ewi.).  There  are  some  signs  showing  that  it  is 
going  to  rain.  Some  insects  become  excited.  Crickets  and  ants 
leave  their  abodes,  and  eartli- worms  come  forth.  The  chords  of 
guitars  become  loose,  and  chronic  diseases  more  virulent.  Tlie  fluid 
of  rain  has  this  effect  (p.  109). 

The  same  holds  good  for  Witul.  Birds  foresee  a  coming  storm, 
and,  Avhen  it  is  going  to  blow,  become  nutated.  But  Wang  Uiung 
goes  farther  and  adopts  the  extravagant  view  that  wind  has  a 
strange  influence  on  perverted  minds,  such  as  robbers  and  thieves, 
prompting  them  to  do  tlieir  deeds,  and  that  by  its  direction  it  in- 
fluences the  market-prices.  From  its  direction  moreover,  all  sorts 
of  calamities  can  be  foreseen  such  as  droughts,  iuundations,  epidemics, 
and  war  (p.  111).  There  is  a  special  science  for  it,  still  practised 
to-day  by  tlie  Imperial  Observatory  at  Peking. 

Ileal  and  Cold  correspond  to  fire  and  water,  to  the  regions, 
and  to  the  seasons.  Near  tlie  fire  it  is  hot,  near  the  water,  cool. 
The  Yang  fluid  is  the  source  of  heat,  the  Yin  fluid  that  of  cold. 
The  South  is  the  seat  of  the  Yang,  the  North  of  the  Yin.  In  sum- 
mer the  Yang  fluid  predominate*,  in  winter  the  Yin.  The  tempe- 
rature can  never  be  changed  for  man's  sake,  nor  does  Heaven  ex- 
press its  feelings  by  it.  AVlien  it  is  cold.  Heaven  is  not  cool,  nor 
is  it  genial  and  cheerful,  when  it  is  warm  (Cliap.  XXI). 

When  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  fluids  come  into  collision,  we 
have  Thunder  and  Lightning  (p.  126).  Tlie  fire  of  the  sun  colliding 
with  the  water  of  the  clouds  causes  an  explosion,  which  is  the 

I'uxi  •  Ueiig.  3 

Digitized  by  Google 


34 


Lun  -  Hong :  Introdaction. 


thunder.  Lightning  is  the  shooting  fortli  of  the  exploding  air 
(Chap.  XXII,  XXIX).  Wang  ( 'h  ting  alleges  5  arguments  to  prove  that 
lightning  must  be  iir<'  (riiap.  XXII).  He  ridicules  the  idea  tliat  thunder 
is  Heaven's  angry  voico,  and  tliar  with  its  thuii(k'rbolt  it  destroys 
the  guilty.  ,k  When  lightning  strikes,  lie  says,  it  liits  a  tree,  da- 
mages a  house,  and  perhaps  kills  a  man.  Hut  not  unfrequently 
a  thunder-clap  is  without  oilect,  causing  no  damage,  and  destroying 
no  human  life.  Does  Heaven  in  sjich  a  caso  indulgo  in  useless 
anger? "  And  wliv  did  it  not  strikr  a  fiend  like  tlie  Emprpss  Lil 
Hon,  but  often  kills  sheep  and  otlier  innocent  animals?  (rod.)  Lu- 
cretius asks  the  same  question: ― 

Quod  si  .luj)piter  atque  nlii  ful^entia  divi 
terrifico  i|ii.itiunt  .sonitu  c.Th*.sti;i  templn 
et  jaciunt  ignem  (juo  ijoiquest  cuinque  voltiptas. 
cur  quihus  incautum  seel  us  aversal>ile  cunujue.st 
non  faciunt  icti  tlamma.s  nt  fulguris  halcnt 
pectore  pcrfixo,  documen  mortal ibus  acre, 
et  potius  nulla  sihi  turpi  consctus  in  re 
volvitur  in  lla minis  innoxius  inque  peditur 
turbine  ca'lesti  suhito  coiTe|)tns  et  if?ni  ？ 
cur  t'tiam  loca  sola  petunt  frustraque  lahoranti'" 

(W.  VI,  380  ： 斷 

The  poet  stares  that  tempests  are  brought  about  by  tlu»  (Con- 
flict of  the  cold  air  of  winter  with  tlie  hot  air  of  summer.  It  is 
a  battle  of  fire  on  the  one.  and  of  wind  and  moisture  on  the  other 
side.  Lightning  is  fire  (eod.  355-375).  Thunder  is  produced  by 
t)ie  cone 職 ion  of  tlio  clouds  chased  by  the  wind  ('W.  04 scq.). 


c)  Ethics. 

In  tlie  Jmh-Uu(j,  ethical  problems  take  up  but  a  small  space. 
Probably  Wnng  has  treated  tlit'm  m(m>  in  detail  in  his  lost 

work,  the  Chi-su^huli-iji  "  Censures  on  Morals.''  In  the  Lun-hmg 
t hey  are  t(m(,l"'(l  upon  more  incidentally. 

Men  are  all  endowed  、vith  the  same  heavenly  fluid,  which 
becomes  their  vital  force  and  their  mind.  There  is  iu>  fundamental 
fliflerence  in  their  organisation.  Hut  the  quantity  of  tl"、  fluids 
varies,  \v}uinoo  the  difleronce  of  tlieir  rharacters.  "  The  fluid  men 
are  endowed  with,  s.nys  Wang  Vh  ung.  is  eitlier  copious  or  (lefi«*ient. 
and  tlu'ir  characters  coiTespoiulinglv  good  or  bad  "  (Chap.  XXXI). 
Epicurus  explains  tin-  difleronce  of  human  characters  by  the  difl'erent 
mixture  of  the  lour  substances  constituting  the  soul. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wanp  Ch  ung's  Philosophy. 


35 


The  vital  fluid  embraces  tlie  Five  Elements  of  Chinese  natural 
philosophy  ：  Water,  fire,  wood,  metal,  and  earth,  which  form  the 
l  ive  Oi^ans  of  the  body :  the  lieart,  tlie  liver,  the  stomach,  the 
lungs,  and  the  kidneys.  These  inn?r  parts  are  the  seats  of  tlie 
Five  Virtues:  — benevolence,  justice,  propriety,  knowledge,  and  truth 
(p.  105).  The  Five  Virtues  are  regarded  as  the  elements  of  human 
character  and  intelligence.  Thus  tlie  quantity  of  the  original  fluid 
has  a  direct  influence  upon  tlie  character  of  the  person.  A  small 
dose  produces  but  a  small  heart,  a  small  liver,  etc.  and  these 
organs  being  small  the  moral  and  mental  qualities  of  the  owner 
can  be  but  small,  insuf'iicient,  bad.  The  copiousness  of  the  fluid 
has  the  opposite  result. 

The  Five  Organs  are  the  substrata  of  the  "  Five  Virtues." 
Any  injury  of  the  former  affects  the  latter.  When  those  organs 
hetxune  diseased,  the  intellect  loses  its  brightness,  and  morality 
declines,  and,  when  these  substrata  of  the  mind  and  its  virtues 
are  completely  destroyed  by  death,  the  mind  ceases  likewise  (p.  195). 

Being  virtually  contained  in  the  vital  or  heavenly  fluid,  tlie 
Five  Virtues  must  come  from  Heaven  and  he  heavenly  virtues 
(Chap.  XLIII).  Heaven  is  unconscious  and  inactive,  therefore  it 
cannot  practise  virtue  in  a  human  way,  but  the  results  of  tlie  spon- 
taneous movement  of  the  heavenly  fluid  are  in  accordance  witli  virtue. 
It  would  not  be  difficult  to  qualify  the  working  of  nature  as  bene- 
volent, just,  and  proper,  which  has  been  done  by  all  religions,  al- 
though uneonsdous  benevolence  and  unconscious  justice  are  queer 
notions,  but  how  about  unconscious  knowledge  and  unconscious 
truth,  the  last  of  the  Five  Virtues?  Wang  Ch' u，"j  finds  a  way  out 
of  this  impasse: ― "  Tlie  heart  of  high  Heaven,  he  says,  is  in  the 
bosom  of  the  Sages,"  an  idea  expressed  already  in  the  Liki  (Ct\ 
Leyges  transl.  Vol.  I，  p.  382).  Heaven  feels  and  thinks  with  their 
hearts  (p.  128  seq.).  Heaven  has  no  heart  of  its  own,  but  the  lieart 
of  the  Sages  as  well  as  of  men  in  gem'ral  are  its  hearts,  for  they  have 
been  produced  by  the  heavenly  fluid.  This  fluid,  originally  a  shapeless 
and  difTuse  mass,  cannot  think  or  feel  by  itself.  To  become  con- 
scious it  requires  an  organism.  In  so  far  it  can  be  said  that  by 
consulting  one's  own  heart,  one  learns  to  know  the  will  of  Heaven, 
that  "  Heaven  acts  through  man "  and  that  "  when  it  reprimands, 
it  is  done  through  the  mouths  of  Sages  "  (eod.). 

Wang  Ch  ung  does  not  enter  upon  a  discussion  on  what  the 
moral  law  really  is,  and  why  it  is  binding.  【Ie  simply  takes  the 
Five  Virtues  in  the  acceptation  given  them  by  tlie  Confucianists. 
But  he  ventilates  another  question,  which  has  bct'n  tal"、n  up  by 

3* 


36 


Lun-H^ng:  Introduction. 


almost  all  the  moralists  from  Menrhis  downward,  that  of  the  orig- 
inal goodness  or  badness  of  Iniman  nature.  Wang  Cliung  acquaints 
us  with  the  different  views  on  tliis  subject.  The  two  extremes 
are  represented  by  -、 fmchis,  who  advocates  the  original  goodness, 
aud  by  IlsSn  Tse、  who  insists  upon  its  badness.  There  are  many 
compromises  between  these  two  contrasting  theories.  Wang  Ch  ung 
himself  takes  a  middle  course,  declaring  that  human  natural  dis- 
position is  sometimes  good,  and  sometimes  bad,  just  as  some  peo- 
ple are  by  nature  very  intelligent,  while  others  are  feeble-minded 
(Chap.  XXXII). 

Original  nature  may  be  changed  by  external  inrtuences.  Good 
people  may  become  bad,  and  bad  ones  may  reform  and  turn  good. 
Such  results  can  be  brought  about  by  intercourse  with  good  or 
bad  persons.  With  a  view  to  reforming  tlie  wicked  the  State  makes 
use  of  public  instruction  and  criminal  law  (Chaj).  XXXI).  Wanr/ 
Ch'ung  adopts  the  classification  of  「" 咖'' W，  wlio  distinguishes  average 
people  and  such  above  and  below  the  average  (Analects  VI,  19). 
" The  character  of  average  people,"  he  says,  "  is  the  work  of  habit. 
M ade  familiar  with  good,  they  turn  out  good,  accustomed  to  evil, 
tliey  become  wicked.  Only  with  extremely  good,  or  extremely  bad 
characters  habit  is  of  no  avail."  These  are  the  people  above  and 
below  the  average.  Their  characters  are  so  inveterate,  that  laws 
and  instructions  are  powerless  against  them.  They  remain  what 
they  are,  good  or  bad  (Chap.  XXXII). 

The  cultivation  of  virtue  is  better  than  the  adoration  of  spirits, 
who  cannot  help  us  (Chap.  XLIV).  Yet  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  be- 
lieve tliat  virtue  procures  happiness.  Felicity  and  misfortune  depend 
on  fate  and  chance,  and  cannot  be  attracted  by  virtue  or  crime 
(Chap.  XXXVIII).  On  the  whole  Wang  ( 'h  ung  does  not  think  much 
of  virtue  and  wisdom  at  all.  He  lias  amalgamated  the  Confucian 
Ethics  with  his  system  hh  far  as  possible,  but  the  Taoist  ideas 
suit  him  much  better  and  break  through  here  and  there.  The 
Taoists  urge  that  virtue  and  wisdom  are  a  decline  from  man's  orig- 
inal goodness.  Originally  people  lived  in  a  state  of  quietude  and 
liappy  ignorance.  kl  Virtuous  actions  were  out  of  the  (iuestion,  and 
the  people  were  dull  and  beclouded.  Knowledge  and  wisdom  did 
not  yet  make  their  appearance  ，，  (p.  100).  They  followed  their 
natural  propensities,  acted  spontaneously,  and  were  happy.  Such 
was  the  conduct  of  the  model  emperors  of  antiquity,  Jhtaug  7Y,  Yao, 
and  S/ntn.  They  lived  in  a  state  of  quietude  and  indifference,  did 
not  work,  and  the  empire  was  governed  by  itself  (p.  98).  They 
nu'rely   iiiutntrd  TTeaven,  who's  principle   is  spontaneity  and  in- 


Digitized  by  Google 


Waiig  Chung's  Philosophy.  37 

action.  Now-a-days  tliis  high  standard  can  ouly  be  attained  by 
the  wisest  and  best  men.  "A  man  with  the  highest,  purest,  and 
fullest  virtue  has  been  endowed  with  a  large  quantity  of  the 
heavenly  fluid,  therefore  he  can  follow  the  example  of  Heaven, 
and  be  spontaneous  and  inactive  like  it "  (loc.  cU.).  lie  need  not 
trouble  about  virtue,  or  act  on  purpose,  for  he  is  naturally  vir- 
tuous, and  all  his  spontaneous  deeds  are  excellent.  The  majority 
of  people,  however,  cannot  reach  this  height.  Having  received 
but  a  small  quota  of  the  heavenly  fluid,  they  cannot  follow  its 
example,  and  become  active.  They  practise  the  routine  virtues, 
which  for  the  superior  man,  who  naturally  agrees  with  them,  are 
of  little  importance. 


d)  Critique. 

Wartg  Ch'tmg  not  only  criticises  the  corairum  ideas,  superstitions, 
and  more  or  less  scientific  theories  current  at  his  time,  but  lie  also 
gives  his  judgment  upon  the  principal  scholars,  whose  tenets  lie 
either  adopts  or  controverts,  and  it  is  not  without  interest  to  learn, 
\\o\\  he  values  well  known  philosophers  aud  historians. 

a)  Miilosopher8. 

Of  all  philosophers  by  far  the  most  frequently  cited  is  Con- 
/'/"•'".  In  Wang  Ch  ung's  estimation  he  is  the  Sage  of  China.  He 
calls  him  the  "  Nestor  iu  wisdom  and  virtue,  and  the  most  eminent 
of  all  philosophers M  (Chap.  XXXII).  Wang  Ch  ung  seems  to  believe 
that  he  has  won  his  cause,  whenever  he  can  quote  (Jon/ttcius  as  his 
authority,  aud  that  with  a  dictum  of  the  Sage  he  can  confound 
all  his  adversaries.  In  quoting  Confueius  he  uses  great  liberty,  in- 
terpreting his  utterances  so  us  to  tally  with  his  own  views.  But 
til  is  veneration  does  not  prevent  him  from  criticising  even  Confucius. 
lie  thinks  it  necessary  to  vindicate  himself  from  the  cliarge  of 
impiety  and  immorality,  intimatiug  tliat  even  Sages  and  Worthies 
are  not  infallible  and  may  err  sometimes  (Chap.  XXX11I).  lie  might 
have  done  anythiug  else,  but  this  otrence  the  Literati  will  never  con- 
done. Ilis  attacks  on  Confucius  are  very  harmless  and  not  even  very 
clever.  He  does  not  impugn  the  Confucian  system,  which  on  the 
contrary  he  upholds,  though  he  departs  from  it  much  farther  than 
he  himself  knows.  His  method  consist*  in  hunting  up  contra- 
dictious and  repugnancies  in  the  Analects.  He  not  seldom  con- 
structs a  contradiction,  where  there  is  none  at  all,  by  putting  much 
more  into  the  words  of  Confucius  than  they  contain.    He  forgets 


Digitized  by  Google 


38 


Lon-H^ng:  Introduction. 


that  in  freely  talking  witli  friends  <»r  pupils— and  the  Analects 
are  nothing  else  than  such  conversations  —  one  does  not  weigh 
every  worth  Besides  the  peculiar  drcumstances  and  the  form  of 
mind  of  the  speaker  inusl  be  taken  into  consideration,  wliicli  Wang 
Ch  uug  often  neglects.  In  short,  the  essay  on  Confmiua  is  in  no 
way  a  in;istfr-piece  of  criticism  and  not  worth  the  fuss  mado  about  it. 

Mrurius,  the  second  'Sage,  is  also  very  oiten  menriouetl.  Wang 
Ch  uny  holds  liiin  in  higli  esteem,  but  treats  his  work  iu  the  same 
way  the  Analects.  The  objections  raised  keep  more  or  less  on 
tlie  surface,  and  do  not  a  fleet  the  substance  of  his  doctrine. 

The  highest  praisr  is  l>esto\ved  on  Ynug  Ilshuty,  another  famous 
Confucianist  of  the  Hon  t-poch.  Wang  Ch  ung  compares  the  historian 
Sse  Ma  C'h'irn  with  tin-  Yellow  River  and  Yang  fhiung  with  the  Haa 
(Chap.  XXXVII).  He  rose  like  a  star  (p.  81),  and  his  chief  work, 
the  T ai-h^lan-cliiny  was  a  m'ation  (p.  88). 

Like  Hum  AV/n  7:w,  Wang  (  linmf  very  often  mentions  M4  Ti 
coujointlv  with  ( 'on/wiu^  as  the  two  great  Sages  of  antiquity.  At 
that  time  the  fan"'  of  ('""/'"•'•'"'  had  n<»t  yet  eclipstMl  the  philosopher 
'"•  mutual  love.  Though  ap^retriating  him,  Wamj  ( 7iung  rejects  his 
system  as  imprartical,  maititaining  that  itu  many  contradictions 
have  prevented  its  .sprea<ling  (Chap.  XXXV 1 1).  The  M^hists  believe 
in  gliosts  ami  spirits  and  adore  them,  imploring  tlieir  help.  At  tlie 
same  timo  tliey  neglert  the  lunerals  and  the  dead,  and  they  deny 
the  existence  of  fate. 

When  Loo  Tsc  is  relVrred  to,  lie  is  usually  introduced  to- 
gether with   Huang  '/V,  who  like  Lao  7:、r  is  looked  upon  as  the 
father  of  Taoism.    Tliey  are  both  called  truly  wise  (p.  98).  Tlio 
I'aoist  school  established  the  principle  of  spontaneity  and  inaction. 
Tlie  philosopliy  of  Wang  ('It  uuy  is  t<»  a  great  extent  on  their 

doctrines  without,  liowever,  becoming  Taoistii",  for  he  leaves  out 
tlie  quink'sst'nee  of  their  system,  '/no,  nor  will  he  have  anything 
oi'  tlieir  transcendentalism,  mysticism  or  other  extravagancies. 

Wang  t'hung  is  well  acquainted  with  the  TiU) is t  writer  //,""• 
\an  7W,  from  whose  work  he  freely  culls,  oftcnor  than  lie  men- 
tions him.  He  refutes  the  legend  that  Thud  Nan  Tse  by  his  alclii- 
mistical  studies  obtained  immortality,  and  with  liis  entire  house- 
hold, including  his  (logs  and  poultry  ascended  to  Hoaven,  sub- 
mitting that  he  either  was  beheaded  for  some  political  intrigues 
or  committed  suicide  (Cliap.  XXVIII). 

Against         Fei  7:、v、  wlio  wroto  on  the  theory  of  government 
and  legislation,   and   whose  writings  are  strougly   tainted  witli 
I'aoisni,  Wnity  <  h  u»y  bliows  a   pronouiicccl  antipathy.  most 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Chfung*s  Philosophy. 


vehemently  attacks  him  for  having  declared  ilio  scholars  and  lite- 
rati to  be  useless  grubs  in  tlie  State.  Han  Fei  Tse  was  of  Dpinioii 
that  rewards  and  punishmeuts  were  sul'fioirnt  to  keep  up  order. 
\\<mg  Ck  wig  objects  that  in  his  system  virtue  has  uo  place.  Unit 
Fn  Tsr  despises  diviuation,  wliich  Wany  C/i  ung  defends.  Han  Fei 
Tse  was  much  appreciated  by  tlie  EmptTor  Ch  in  Shih  Huang  77,  a 
great  admirer  of  liis  works,  、vl"(，h，  however,  did  not  hinder  tlie 
tyrant  from  condemning  him  to  death  for  some  political  reason. 

It  is  passing  strange  that  the  great  Taoist  pliilosophers  Lieh 
Tse  and  Ch  uang  Tse  are  not  once  named.  Were  they  so  little  reatl 
at  Wang  Cliuiig's  time,  that  lie  did  not  know  them?  Some  of  his 
stories  are  told  in  Lieli  Tse  likewise  with  nearly  the  saiue  words, 
but  it  does  not  follow,  that  they  must  be  quott-d  lrom  Lieh  Tse, 
for  such  narrations  arc  often  found  in  several  authors,  oue  copying 
from  the  other  without  acknowl<«dging  his  sounr. 

A  scholar,  of  whom  W'mig  Ch  ung  speaks  very  often  is  Tung 
(  hung  Shu,  a  very  prolific  writer  of  the  2nd  rent.  nx.  Ho  was  said 
by  many  to  have  completed  the  doctrine  of  Con/iicius,  while  others 
lield  that  he  had  perverted  it.  Wang  Chung  thinks  that  both  views 
are  wrong  (Chap.  XXXVU).  Tung  Clmny  Shu  (If voted  his  labours  to 
the  Cliun-ch  hi,  but  lie  also  wrote  on  the  raagiral  arts  (p.  84)  and 
<m  Taoism.  Wang  Ch  ung  says  that  his  arguments  on  Taoist  doc- 
trines are  very  queer,  but  that  his  ideas  on  morals  and  on  go- 
vernment are  excellent,  lu  human  nature  Tung  Chung  Shu  dis- 
tinguishes between  natural  disposition  and  feeling.  The  former, 
lie  says,  is  the  outcome  of  tl"，  Ynny  principle  and  therefore  good,  the 
feelings  are  produced  by  the  Yin  and  are  therefore  bad  (Chap.  XXXLI). 
Tung  Chung  Shu  seems  to  have  been  the  inventor  of  a  special 
rain-sacritici'.  Tlie  figure  of  a  dragon  was  put  up  to  attract  the 
rain.  Wang  Ch  umj  stands  up  for  it  with  great  fervour  and  attempts 
to  prove  its  efficacy  (p.  55,  N.  47). 

Of  Tsau  Yen  many  miracles  were  already  related  at  Wang 
Chung's  time.  He  rejects  tliem  as  fictions,  llsou  Yens  writings 
were  brilliant,  he  says,  but  too  vague  and  diffuse  (Chap.  XXX\T1I). 
With  his  above  meutioned  tlicory  of  the  Nine  Continents  Wang 
Clinng  does  not  agree. 

The  sophist  Kung  Sun  Lung  as  well  as  Kuan  Tse  and  S/iang 
Yang,  who  both  have  philosophised  on  the  Suite,  are  rather  se- 
verely dealt  with  ((  liap.  XXXVII).  On  the  other  hand  Wamj  Cltumj 
is  very  lavish  in  his  praise  of  the  writers  of  the  Ifan  time  vu.  Liu 
Haiang,  Lu  Chia,  author  of  the  Hsin-yil,  a  work  on  government,  I  hum 
Chun  Shan,  author  of  the  Hmi-lun,  and  Iluan  K  uun,  who  wrote  tlie 


Digitized  by  Google 


40 


Lun-Heng:  Introduction. 


Yen-i  ic/i-lun,  a  work  on  finance  and  other  State  questions.  Besides 
Wang  L'h  ung  gives  the  names  of  a  number  of  his  contpmporaries 
to  whom  lie  predicts  immortality,  but  he  has  been  a  bad  prophet, 
for  save  one  they  are  all  forgotten  now. 

|3)  Historians. 

It  was  a  great  controversy  during  the  Han  epoch,  which 
commentary  to  the  Ch  un-cKiu  was  the  best.  The  Tso-chuan  had 
not  yet  secured  the  position,  it  holds  now  ；  many  scholars  gave 
the   preference   to   the   works  of  Ynng  or  Am  Luing.  Wang 

CKung  avers  that  Tso  Cliin  Mings  Tso-chwin  surpasses  all  the  others, 
and  that  having  lived  nearer  to  Coiiftu-itis  time  than  the  other 
commentatore,  Tm  C/i  iu  Ming  has  had  more  facilities  to  ascertain 
the  views  of  the  Sa^e  and  to  give  them  in  their  purest  form. 
Wattg  Ch  ung  confirms  that  the  Kuo-yil  is  also  the  work  of  Tso 
ch  in  Ming  (Chap.  XXXV11).  Many  of  Wang  (  h'uugs  stories  aud 
myths  are  taken  from  the  Tso-clomn. 

Of  the  Lii-s/i iJi^/i im-<li  in  of  Lil  l*u  Wei,  an  important  work  - 
ibr  antique  lore,  Wauy  Ch  ung  says  that  it  contains  too  much  of 
the  marvellous. 

To  illustrate  his  theories  Wantj  ('It  any  often  lays  the  Shi-d" 
under  contribution.  Of  its  author,  Sac  Ma  t'A'»>",  he  speaks  with 
great  deference,  and  regards  him  as  the  greatest  writer  of  the  I  fan 
period-  What  lie  reproaches  him  witli.  is  that  '、'•、.'，  Ma  Ch  ifn  too 
often  leaves  us  in  the  dark  as  to  liis  own  opini<»u  on  a  (juestion, 
stating  only  the  bare  i'aets,  or  giving  two  different  versions  of  tlie 
same  event  without  deciding,  which  is  tlie  correct,  one  (loc.  cii.). 

Pan  Am,  Wang  C/i  uny  s  contemporary  and  the  soa  of  his 
teacher  l*an  Pino,  is  lauded  for  his  good  veracs  and  memorials 
(he.  cit.).  He  is  the  one  contemporary  of  our  philosopher,  who 
really  has  become  immortal  by  his  great  work,  the  Han-shu.  At 
Wang  Ch  ung's  time  it  had  not  yet  appeared,  and  so  is  never  re- 
ferred to.  【t  was  completed  and  published  after  t*an  Kns  death 
by  his  sister  hw  Clmo. 

That  he  possesses  some  abilities  in  the  field  of  literary  and 
historical  critique  himself,  Wang  C/i  tmy  sliows  in  his  remarks  on 
the  origin  and  history  of  the  Classics.  He  tells  us,  how  tliey  were 
composed,  how  discovered  after  the  Burning  of  the  Books,  how 
handed  down,  and  how  divided  into  books  and  chapters  (Chap. 
XXX VI).  In  spite  ol*  his  profound  veneration  for  the  classical 
literature  he  does  not  hesitate  to  censure  those  passages,  which  do 
not  lind  his  approval,  or  to  expose  tlie  exaggerations  and  fables 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch  ung  s  f^iilosophy. 


41 


\tith  which  tliey  teem  (p.  51,  N.  27).  In  like  manner  he  is  in- 
defatigable in  detecting  Tavist  fictions  and  inventions  and  in  re- 
ducing them  to  their  true  measure,  for  it  does  not  satisfy  him  to 
demonstrate  their  impossibility;  lie  desires  to  find  out,  how  they 
originated  (p.  50,  N.  24).  He  combats  the  legends  which  have 
found  their  way  into  the  historical  literature,  although  they  are 
less  freijuent  than  in  tli«  Taoist  works  (p.  50，  N.  25-26).  Tlie 
entire  Lun-hihtg  is  a  big  battle  agains  these  errors.  His  discussions 
would  seem  sometimes  a  little  lengthy,  and  tlie  subject  not  to  require 
such  an  amount  of  arguments,  for  we  would  prove  tlie  same  with 
a  few  words,  or  not  discuss  it  at  all,  the  proiuisition  being  fV»r  us 
self-evident.  We  must  however  bear  in  mind,  tliat  wliat  for  us 
now  is  self-evident  and  indisputable,  、vas  not  so  for  the  (  liiuese, 
for  whom  Wang  (  liuny  wrote  his  l>'，ok，  and  that  to  shake  t}>em  in 
their  deep-seated  persuasions  a  huge  apparatus  of  logic  was  ne- 
cessary. Even  then  probably  the  majority  held  fast  to  their  pre- 
conceptions. The  triumphant  maroli  of  logic  is  checked,  as  soon 
as  sentiment  and  prejudice  cornea  in. 

Historically  Wang  Ch' umj  takes  another  point  of  view  than 
his  contemporaries,  who  tor  the  most  part  took  little  interest  in 
their  own  time,  and  let  their  laucies  wander  back  to  the  golden 
age  of  remote  antiquity.  Wany  (  K uny  is  more  modern  tlian  most 
Chinese  of  the  present  day.  He  was  of  opinion  that  the  linn  dy- 
nasty was  as  good,  even  better  than  tlie  famous  old  dynasties 
(p.  56,  N.  56).  Fivt'  essays  bear  upon  this  thesis.  His  reasoning 
is  very  larae  however,  for  instead  of  speaking  of  the  government, 
he  ouly  treats  of  the  auspicious  portents  proving  the  excellence  of 
the  ruling  sovereigns. 


e)  Religion  and  Folklore. 

The  religion  of  the  (Miinesc  at  tlie  Han  time  was  a  cult  of 
nature  combined  with  ancestor  worship.  Tliey  regarded  certain 
parts  of  nature  and  certain  uatural  phenomena  as  spirits  or  as 
animated  by  spirits,  and  tried  to  propitiate  them  and  tlie  ghosts 
of  their  ancestors  by  prayery  and  sacrifices,  (  onvinced  that  these 
spirits  and  ghosts  could  help  them,  or  do  thcin  harm,  ua  they 
chose,  they  contrived  to  wiu  tlieir  good  graces,  prayiug  for  happi- 
ness, imploring  tlioni  to  avert  evil,  aud  si  lowing  tlieir  gratitude  for 
received  benefita  by  their  oflVrings. 

The  chief  deities  worsliipprd  during  the  Chon  period  were: ― 


Digitized  by  Google 


42 


LuiJ-Heng:  Introduction. 


Heaven  and  its  parts: ― tlie  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  Stars.  Amoiig 
the  latter  the  /'7<v  IHdnets  take  the  first  place,  but  tbe  28  Solar 
Mamion^  and  other  ronsti'llations,  such  as  tlie  Dipper  and  the  Stars 
of  LongerUy  were  likewise  adored. 

Earth  and  its  parts,  Mountains  and  Rivers,  the  SoiJ.,  and  the 
Grain  growing  on  it,  and  some  of  its  phciioinena: ― Kart/t-^naJces, 
Water  (Inundations),  and  Drottghls. 

Meteorological  phenomena: 一 Wind  and  Jini",  Ileal  and  (:oM, 
'llmuder  and  Lightning. 

The  Four  S^'fi-som  and  tlie  Fou',  Qttarters. 

The  Five  Parts  of  the  House  ： ― The  (； ale,  the  l)oory  tin*  HW/, 
the  Hearth,  and  tin'  Court. 

Deified  lK*av»Mi  was  often  looked  upou  as  an  emperor,  the  Em- 
peror on  Higli  or  (lie  Suprt'ine  Huler,  anil  so  were  tho  Planets, 
called  the  Blue,  Red,  Yellow,  White,  and  Black  Kiuperore.  The 
other  stars  and  constellations  w  vrv  their  officials.  All  these  deities 
have,  as  a  rule,  no  distinct  personality,  and  still  quite  clearly  show 
tho  traces  of  their  origin.  The  44  Primv  of  the  Wind,"  the  "  Master 
of  Rain,''  the  "  Thunderer,"  tho  "  Door  God."  and  the  "  Spirit  ol' 
the  II  earth kk  or  "Kitchen  God "  were  i>erliap«  more  than  the 
others  apprelicniU'd  as  personal  gods. 

The  Spirits  of  the  Soil  and  Grain  were  at  the  outset  probably 
not  different  lrom  the  otlifr  spirits  animating  nature,  but  according 
to  very  old  traditions  two  persons:— AV>«  Lnmj  aud  (7/  /  have  after 
their  deaths  been  deified  and  raised  to  the  rauk  of  tutelary  genii 
of  the  land  and  grain.  These  apotheoses  of  men  after  their  death 
became  more  frequent  in  later  ages.  Under  the  Chin  dynasty 
Cltih  Yu,  a  legendary  personage  renowndod  for  his  military  exploits, 
was  worshipped  as  War  God.  The  three  sons  of  the  mythical 
emperor  Chtan  llsil  after  their  death  became  Water  Spirits  and  Spirits 
of  Kjjiilemies,  and  a  woman,  who  had  died  in  cliildbed,  and  whose 
ghost  liad  appeared  to  somebody  after  \wr  doccasi',  was  made 
/V/ikv.v.s  of  Demons  under  the  I  In"  ilyiuisty. 

Here  、vc  have  ancestral  worship.  Kvt'ry  family  used  to  revere 
the  ghosts  of  its  deceased  ancestors,  but  only  in  sucli  exceptional 
vanes  as  those  quoted  above  did  these  ghosts  later  on  become 
national  gods. 

The  cult  of  the  afore-meiitioued  deities  was  continued  during 
the  Ha n  o[)Ofli,  and  with  some  few  alterations  has  gone  on  up  to 
the  pivscnt  day.  It  is  the  State  religion  of  China,  sanctioned  by 
Govern  in  en  t,  and  practised  by  the  Son  of  llcaveu  and  his  highest 
oflicials.    Buddliism  aud  Taoism  arc  only  tolerated.  Confucianism 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wang  Ch  ung  s  Pliilo^opliy. 


43 


is  no  religion,  but  the  official  moral  system,  、vlii《，li  completely 
agrees  with  the  cult  of  nature. 

The  sacrijices  to  the  spirits  of  nature  were  in  ancient  times 
performed  by  the  Emperor,  the  Feudal  Princes,  and  the  officials, 
acting  as  high-priests  for  their  people.  The  people  used  to  sacri- 
fice only  to  their  own  ancestors  and  to  tlie  Spirits  of  the  Door  or 
the  Hearth.  The  oblations  were  burnt-offerings  of  animals  jand 
libations  of  wine.  There  was  no  clergy  to  mediate  between  the 
gods  and  the  people.  Tliese  rules  were  less  strictly  observed 
during  the  Han  epoch,  when  onrasionally  priests  sacriliced  in  the 
place  of  the  Kmporor,  and  even  priestesses  were  allowed  to  make 
offerings  in  their  temples,  lu  out-of-the-way  places,  where  no 
officials  were  near,  the  people  could  tliemselves  worship  tl"、  gods, 
whose  service  else  was  incumbent  upon  the  magistrates  (et\  Chap.  XL1, 
XL1【  ami  Shi-chi  cliap.  27-28). 

Wang  Ch  ung  asserts  tliat  most  of  these  sacrifices  are  super- 
fluous, because  the  deities  thus  honoured  are  merely  parts  of  others, 
to  wliich  offerings  are  matlc  likewise.  The  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the 
Stare  arc  parts  of  Ileaveu.  They  must  participate  in  the  oblations 
oflfered  to  H«*aven,  why  then  give  them  special  sacrifices  to  boot? 
With  Mountains  and  Rivers,  the  Soil  and  Grain,  which  are  the 
constituent  parts  of  Earth,  it  is  tl»e  same.  Would  any  reasonable 
person,  irrespective  of  his  usual  meals,  specially  feed  his  limbs? 
((、haP.  XI 丄） 

Moreover,  spirits  and  ghosts  cannot  enjoy  the  sacrifices,  for 
there  are  noue,  at  least  not  personal  beiugs,  as  people  soem  to 
imagiue  (Chap.  XLIV).  If  they  were  air,  they  could  not  eat  nor  smell, 
and  if  they  had  a  body,  it  would  br  so  enormous,  that  men  could 
never  satisfy  their  appetite.  How  should  they  feed  the  Earth  or  even 
a  Mountain  or  a  River?  {eod.  and  Cliap.  XXI.)  Being  formed  of  the 
shapeless  fluid,  ghosts  and  spirits  can  neither  feel  nor  act,  conse'qiu'ntly 
they  cannot  do  anything  for  man  nor  against  hiui.  Ergo  by  sacrifices 
lie  does  not  obtaiu  his  end,  divine  protection  (Chap.  XLIl).  There- 
fore sacrifices  can  be  nothing  more  than  symbolical  acts,  showing 
the  gratitude  and  the  affection  of  the  sacrificer.  He  is  thankful 
for  all  the  kindness  lie  has  received  from  Heaven  and  Earth,  and 
from  his  parents  and  forefathers  {eod.).  Sacrifices  are  manifestations 
of  the  piety  of  him,  who  oilers  tliero,  but  their  omission  cannot 
have  any  evil  consequence. 

Exorcism  is  the  correlate  of  prayers  and  sacrifices.  The  an- 
cient Chinese  used  to  practise  it  particularly  with  the  Spirit  of 
Sickness,  whom  tliry  expelled.    Wdny  (li tiny  thinks  it  an  useless  as 


Digitized  by  Google 


44 


Lun-IIeng:  Introduction. 


sacrifices,  for,  says  he,  provided  the  spirits  are  mist  and  vapours, 
they  oanuot  do  any  harin,  should  they  really  exist,  however,  then 
they  would  indubitably  not  allow  themselves  to  be  driven  off. 
They  would  not  only  offer  resistance,  but  also  resent  the  affront, 
and  take  their  revenge  upon  the  exorcist  (Chap.  XLIV). 

Primitive  Chinese  religion  lias  not  produced  a  mythology 
worth  speaking  of,  but  a  variety  of  superstitions  have  clustered 
around  it.  Some  of  them  Watig  Cli'uny  brings  to  our  notice.  The 
principle  aim  of  Chinese  religion  is  to  obtain  happiness  and  to 
remove  evil.  But  is  does  not  suffice  to  worship  the  spirits,  one 
must  also  avoid  such  actions,  as  might  bring  down  misfortune.  In 
the  popular  belief  there  is  a  certain  mystic  connection,  a  sort  of 
harmony  between  fate  arid  human  activity,  though  one  does  not 
see  how.  When  the  Yamen  officials  are  very  bad,  the  number  of 
tigers  increases  so  much,  tliat  plenty  of  people  are  devoured  by 
them.  The  rapacity  of  the  underlings  is  believed  to  cause  grubs 
and  insects  to  eat  grain  (p.  55,  N.  48-49).  It  is  dangerous  to  ex- 
tend a  building  to  the  west,  one  must  not  see  women  who  recently 
have  given  birth  to  a  child,  and  children  born  in  the  first  or  the 
fifth  months  should  not  be  brought  up,  lor  tliey  will  be  the  cause 
of  their  parent*  death  (p.  59,  N.  G8).  Exceptional  precautions  must 
be  taken  in  building  a  new  bouse  (p.  60,  N.  74). 

For  inoat  actions  in  ever)r-d ay-life  the  time  chosen  is  of  the 
utmost  importance.  An  unlucky  time  spoils  everything.  The  Chiue«c 
at  tlie  llan  ep"(，h  had  not  only  tlieir  dies  fasti  aud  nefasti,  but  pro- 
pitious and  un[>rc>pitious  years,  mouths,  days,  and  hours.  Special 
books  gave  the  necessary  informatiou.  For  some  actions  certain 
lucky  days  had  to  be  chosen,  for  others  certain  unlucky  ones  had 
to  be  avoided.  Special  days  were  assigued  for  the  commencing  of 
a  new-building  or  for  funerals.  Bathing  on  certain  days,  women 
were  sure  to  become  lovely,  on  others  tliey  would  become  ill- 
favoured.  Moving  oues  residence  one  should  avoid  a  collision 
with  the  Spirit  of  the  North,  Tai  Sui  (p.  59，  N.  70，  72,  73).  People 
neglecting  tliese  rules  would  fall  in  with  malignant  spirits,  or  meet 
with  evil  iutluences.  These  ideas  liave  come  down  to  our  time,  and 
are  still  clieris<lied  by  the  majority  of  the  Chinese.  The  calendar 
publishetl  every  year  by  tlie  Board  of  Astronomy  serves  them  as 
a  guide,  noting  that  whidi  may  be  safely  done  ou  eacli  day,  and 
that  which  iuay  not.  Wang  (  It  nng  lias  done  】iis  best  to  eradicate 
these  superstitious,  showing  tlieir  unreasonableness  and  futility,  as 
we  see  with  little  success,  so  deeply  are  they  still  rooted  in  tlie 
Chinese  mind  after  nearly  two  thousand  years. 


Digitized  by  Google 


45 

4.*  Table  of  Contents  of  the  Lun-h^ng. 

Book  I. 

1.   Chap.  I.   Frng-yii 逸遇 

This  chapter  treats  of  the  relation  between  ofBcers  and  their 
sovereign.  To  be  appreciated  and  successful  an  official  must  find 
the  right  prince,  who  understands  him  and  puts  him  in  the  right 
place.  One  must  not  make  the  successful  responsible  for  their 
success,  or  the  unsuccessful  for  their  failure,  because  not  their  talents, 
but  time  and  circumstances  are  decisive. 


2.    Chap.  II.   Lei-hni 累 ^ 

The  difficulties  and  annoyances  which  people  have  to  endure 
come  from  abroad,  and  are  not  tlie  result  of  their  own  works.  There- 
fore they  must  not  be  blamed.  Fear  and  good  conduct  have  no 
in^hieDc^oi^jbpNme  or  misfortune.  "  Fortune  is  what  we  obtain 
wifTiout  any  effort  of  our  own,  and  misfortune  what  liappens  to 
us  without  our  co-operation."  The  chief  annoyances  of  officials  at 
the  court  and  in  the  provinces  are  slanderous  reports  of  envious 
persons.  Three  kinds  of  calumnies  are  distinguished.  The  wise 
do  not  feel  troubled  about  this,  and  lead  the  life  which  most 
suits  them. 


*3.   Chap.  III.    Ming-lu 命祿 (On  Destiny  and  Fortune). 

Destiny  predetermines  the  length  of  man's  life,  and  whether 
he  shall  be  ric))  and  honourable,  or  poor  and  mean.  There  is  no 
correspondence  between  human  virtue  and  fate.  The  wicked  and 
the  unintelligent  are  very  often  hapj)y,  wliereas  men  endowed  with 
the  highest  faculties  and  the  noblest  character  perish  in  misery, 
as  is  shown  by  various  examples  from  history.  The  knowing, 
therefore,  do  not  hunt  after  happiness,  but  leave  everything  to 
Heaven,  suffering  with  equanimity  what  cannot  be  avoided,  and 
placidly  awaiting  their  turn.  The  opinions  of  several  philosophers 
holding  similar  views  are  given. 


*4.  Chap.  IV.    CJCi-sJimi 氣， (Long  Life  and  Vital  Fluid). 

There  are  two  kinds  of  fate,  the  one  determining  tlie  events 
of  life,  the  other  its  length.    The  length  of  life  depends  on  the 

Note: ― The  chapters  marked  with  an  asterisk  have  been  translated. 


Digitized  by  Google 


46  ，    ••  Lun  - H(-ng :  IntroHurtion. 

quantity  of  the  vital  fluid  received  at  birth.  Accordingly  the  body 
waxes  strong  or  weak,  and  u  strong  body  lives  longer  than  a 
feeble  one.  The  normal  length  of  human  life  should  be  a  hundred 
years.  The  Classics  attest  that  the  wise  emperors  of  the  Golden 
Age: 一  Yno,  Shun,  HV/<  Wang,  Wu  Wang,  aud  others  all  lived  over 
hundred  years. 


Book  II. 

*5.   Cliap.  I.   Hsing-ou 幸偶   (On  Chance  and  Lurk). 

Happiness  and  misfortune  are  not  the  outcome  of  man's  good 
or  bad  actions,  but  cliaDce  and  hu:k.  Some  have  good  luck,  others 
bad.  Good  and  bad  fortune  are  not  distributed  in  a  just  way, 
according  to  wortli,  but  are  mere,  chance.  This  is  true  of  man 
as  well  as  of  other  beings.  Even  Sages  are  often  visited  with 
misfortune. 


*6.   CI wip.  II.   Ming-yi 命義 (What  is  meant  by  Destiny?). 

The  school  of  Ti  denies  the  existence  of  Destiny.  Wang 
Cliung  follows  the  authority  of  Confucius.  There  are  various  kinds 
of  destinies.  The  length  of  human  life  is  regulated  by  the  fluid 
of  Heaven,  their  wealth  and  honour  by  the  effluence  of  the  stars, 
with  whicli  men  are  imbued  at  their  birth.  Wang  Ch  ung  rejects 
the  distinction  of  natural,  concomitant,  and  adverse  fate,  but  admits 
contingencies,  changes,  and  incidents,  which  may  either  agree  with 
the  original  fate  and  luck,  or  not.  The  fj»te  of  n  State  is  always 
stronger  than  that  of  individuals. 

*7.   Cliap.  III.    Wu-h$ing  無形  (Unfounded  Assertions). 

At  birth  man  receives  tlie  vital  fluid  from  Heaven.  This 
fluid  determines  the  length  of  his  life.  There  are  no  means  to 
prolong  its  duration,  as  the  Taoists  pretend.  Some  examples  from 
history  are  shown  to  be  untrustworthy.  At  death  everything  ends. 
The  vital  force  disperses ,  and  the  body  is  dissolved. 


*8.   Chap.  IV.  Shuai-hsing 率' 晚 (Tlio  Forming  of  Characters). 

There  are  naturally  good,  and  there  are  naturally  bad  char- 
acters, but  tliis  (Hflerence  between  the  qualities  of  low  and  superior 
men  is  not  fundamental.  The  original  fluid  permeating  all  is  the 
same.   It  contains  the  germs  of  the  Five  Virtues.   Those  who  are 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  Luti  -hrng. 


47 


endowed  with  copious  fluids,  become  vrituous,  those  whose  fluid 
is  deficient,  wicked.  But  by  external  influences,  human  nature  can 
turn  from  good  into  bad.  and  the  reverse.  Bad  people  can  be  im- 
proved, and  bi'i-onie  good  !>y  instruction  and  good  example.  There- 
fore the  State  cannot  dispense  with  instructions  and  laws. 

*9.    Chap.  V.    Ch'i-yen 吉驗  (Auspicious  Portents). 

Auspicious  portents  appear,  when  somebody  is  destined  to 
something  grand  by  fate,  especially,  when  a  ne、v  dynasty  rises. 
These  manifestations  of  fate  appear  either  iu  the  person's  body, 
or  as  lucky  signs  in  nature,  or  under  the  form  of  a  halo  or  a 
glare.  A  great  variety  of  instances  from  ancient  times  down  to 
tlie  Han  dynasty  are  adduced  in  proof. 

Book  III. 
10.  Chap.  I.   Ou-hui 偶會. 

Fate  acts  spontaneously.  There  are  no  other  alien  forces  at 
work  besides  fate.  Nobody  is  able  to  do  anything  against  it. 
Human  activity  is  of  no  consequence. 

*11.   Cliap.  II.   Ku-hiang 骨相  (On  Anthroposeopy). 

The  heavenly  fate  becomes  visible  in  the  body,  and  can  be 
foreseen  by  anthroposeopy.  The  Classics  contain  examples.  The 
physiognomists  draw  their  conclusions  from  the  osseous  structure 
and  from  the  lines  of  the  skin.  The  character  can  also  be  seen 
from  the  features. 

*12.    Chap.  III.    Ch'u-ping 初東. (Heaven's  Original  Gift). 

Destiny  comes  down  upon  man  already  in  liis  embryonic  state, 
not  later  on  (luring  his  life.  It  becomes  mind  internally  and  body 
externally.  This  law  governs  all  organisms.  Heaven  never  invests 
virtuous  emperors,  because  it  is  pleased  with  tliein,  for  this  would 
be  in  opposition  to  its  principle  of  spontaneity  and  inaction.  Utter- 
ances of  the  Classics  that  Hoaven  was  plt'aM'd  and  lodged  round, 
etc.  are  to  be  taken  in  a  figurative  sense.  Hoaven  has  no  human 
body  and  no  human  qualities.  Lucky  omens  arc  not  sent  by  Hoaven, 
but  appear  by  chance. 


Digitized  by  Google 


48 


Luti  -  Hcng :  Introduction. 


M3.   Ch«ip.  IV.   Pen-hsing 本' f%  (On  Original  Nature). 

The  (liflerent  theories  of  Cliinese  moralists  on  human  nature 
are  discussed.  S/iih  Tse  holds  that  human  nature  is  partly  good, 
partly  bad,  Mmcim  that  it  is  originally  good,  but  can  be  corrupted, 
Swi  Tse  that  it  is  originally  bad,  Kao  Tse  that  it  is  neither  good 
nor  bad,  and  that  it  all  depends  on  instruction  and  development, 
Ltt  Chia  that  it  is  predisposed  for  virtue.  Tung  Chtng  Shu  and 
Lin  Hsiang  distinguish  between  natural  disposition  and  natural  feel- 
ings. Wang  Chung  holds  that  nature  is  some  times  good  and  some- 
times bad,  but  essentially  alike,  being  the  fluid  of  Heaven,  and 
adopts  tlie  Confucian  distinction  of  average  people,  people  above, 
and  people  below  the  average.  The  latter  alone  can  be  changed 
by  habit. 

*14.   Chap.  V.    Wu-shih 物勢 (The  Nature  of  Things). 

HeaA'en  and  Earth  do  not  create  man  and  the  other  things 
on  earth  intentionally.  Thov  all  grow  of  themselves.  Had  Heaven 
produced  all  creatures  on  purpose,  it  would  liave  taught  tl'em 
mutual  love,  whereas  now  one  destroys  the  other.  Some  have  ex- 
plained this  struggle  for  existenw  by  the  hypotltesis  that  all  creatures 
are  filled  with  the  fluid  of  the  Five  Elements,  whicli  fight  together 
and  overcome  one  another.  Wmig  (Vung  controverts  this  view  and 
the  symbolism  connected  therewith. 

"5.   Chap.  VI.    Chi-kuai 竒怪 (Miracles). 

VTfl/iy  Ch  ung  proves  bv  analogies  that  the  supernatural  births 
reported  of  several  old  legendary  rulers,  、vlio  are  said  to  have  been 
procreated  by  dragons  or  a  special  fluid  of  Heaven,  are  impossible. 
The  Spirit  of  Heaven  would  not  consort  with  a  woman,  for  only 
beings  of  the  same  species  pair.  Saints  and  Sages  are  born  like 
other  people  from  their  parents. 

Book  IV. 

16.   Chap.  I.   Shwhsii 書虛. 

The  chapter  contains  a  refutation  of  a  series  of  wrong  state- 
ments in  ancient  books.  The  assertion  that  Sfmu  and  Yil  died  in  the 
South  is  shown  to  be  erroneous.  Wany  C/i  uny  explodes  the  idea 
that  the  '•  Ik>n、  •，  af  Hang-chou  is  caused  by  the  angry  spirit  of 
W'n  Tse  lhil,  M'ho  was  tlirown  into  the  Ch  ien-t  any  Rirer,  and  re- 
marks that  the  tido  follows  the  phases  of  the  moon.  (Bk.  IV,  p.  5 v.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  Lan  -  h^ng. 


49 


17.  Chap.  n.  Pien-hsU 春虛. 
Wnng  (^h'ung  points  out  that  many  reports  in  ancient  literature 
concerning  extraordinary  phenomena,  not  in  harmony  with  the  laws 
of  nature,  are  fictitious  and  unreliable,  e.  g.  the  story  tliat  touched 
by  the  virtue  of  Duke  Ching  of  Sung,  the  planet  Mars  sliifted  its 
plac*',  that  Heaven  rewarded  the  Duke  with  21  extra  years,  or  that 
the  great  Diviner  of  (Tti  caused  an  earthquake. 

Book  V. 

18.   Chap.  I.   Yi-hsit 異虛. 

The  impossibility  of  some  miracles  and  supernatural  events 
is  demonstrated,  which  have  been  handed  down  in  ancient  works, 
and  are  universally  Mievtnl  by  the  people  and  the  literati,  e.  g.  the 
birth  of  Pao  Sse  from  the  saliva  of  dragons. 

19.   Chap.  II.   Kan-hsii 感虚. 

Wang  Ch  ung  contests  that  nature  can  he  moved  by  man  and 
deviate  from  its  course.  Various  old  legends  art*  critically  tested  ： ― 
the  alleged  appearence  of  ten  suns  in  Yait's  time,  the  report  that 
the  sun  went  back  in  his  course,  the  wonders  wliich  happened 
during  the  captivity  of  Tsou  Yen  and  Tan,  Prince  of  Yen. 

The  tenor  of  tlie  last  four  chapters  all  treating  of  unfouuded 
assertions  or  figments  " hsd"  is  very  similar. 

Book  VI. 

*20.  Chap.  I.  Fu-htii      f,Jj'  (Wrong Notions abotit  Happiness). 

Happiness  is  not  pven  by  Heaven  as  a  reward  for  good  actions, 
as  the  general  belief  is.  The  M^Jiht  theory  that  the  spirits  pro- 
tect and  help  the  virtuous  is  controverted  by  facts.  Wang  Ch  uug 
shows  liow  several  cases,  adduced  as  instances  of  how  Heaven  re- 
compensed the  virtuous  are  illusive,  and  that  fate  is  capricious 
and  unjust. 

*21.  Chap.  II.  Huo-hsu  ^ffj  )^  (Wrong Notions  on  Unliappiness). 

The  common  belief  that  Heaven  and  Earth  and  the  spirits 
punish  tlie  wicked  and  visit  tliem  with  misfortiuu',  is  erroneous, 
aa  shown  by  examples  of  virtuous  men,  who  were  unlucky,  and 
of  wicked,  who  flourished.  All  tliis  is  the  result  of  chance  and 
luck,  fate  and  time. 

Lun-Unig.  »4 


Digitized  by  Google 


50 


Lun-Heng:  Introdaction. 


*22.   Chap.  III.   Lung-hsil 龍虚 (On  Dragons). 

The  dragon  is  not  a  spirit,  but  has  a  body  and  lives  in  pools. 
It  is  not  fetched  by  Heaven  during  a  thunderstorm,  as  people  believe. 
Tlie  different  views  about  its  shape  are  given:— It  is  represented 
as  a  snake  with  a  horse's  head,  as  a  Hying  croaturt',  as  a  reptile 
that,  can  be  mounted,  and  like  earthworms  and  ants.  In  ancient 
times  dragons  were  reared  ami  eaten.  The  dragon  rides  on  the 
clouds  during  the  tempest,  there  being  a  certain  sympathy  between 
fhe  dragon  and  clouds.  It  can  ex[)and  and  contract  its  hotly,  ami 
make  itself  invisible. 

*23.   Chap.  IV.   Lei-hn  (On  Thundor  and  Litflitnin^). 

Thunder  is  not  the  expression  of  Heaven's  anger.  As  a  spirit 
it  could  not  give  a  sound,  "or  could  it  kill  a  man  with  its 
breath.  It  does  not  Iau«>h  cither.  Very  often  the  innocent  are 
struck  by  lightning,  and  monsters  like  tlie  Empress  L(l  Hon  are 
spared.  The  pictorial  represeiit«itions  of  thunder  as  united  drums, 
or  as  the  thundert'r  Ln  Kung,  are  misleading.  Tlninder  is  lire  or 
hot  air,  tlie  solar  fluid  Yang  exploding  in  its  conflict  witli  the  Yin 
fluid,  lightning  being  the  shooting  tbrtli  of  the  air.  Five  arguments 
are  given,  why  thunder  must  be  fire. 

Book  VII. 

*24.   Chap.  I.    Tao-hsii 道虛 （Taoist  Untruths). 

Man  dies  aud  can  become  immortal.  The  Taoist  stories  of 
Huang  Ti  and  Ihtoi  \an  Tsc's  ascension  to  heaven,  of  the  flying 
genius  met  by  Lu  Ao.  and  of  Ilshng  Man  Tse's  travel  to  the  moon 
are  inventions.  The  magiciaus  do  not  possess  the  powers  ascribed 
to  tlieni.  Tl"，  Taoist  theory  (>f  prolonging  life  by  quietism  and 
dispassionateness,  l»y  regulating  one's  breath,  and  using  medicines 
is  untenable. 

*25.   Chap.  II.    Yii-tseng 語滑 （Exaggerations). 

Wang  L'h'uny  points  out  a  number  of  historical  exaggerations 
e.  g.  that  the  ewhonpoint  of  (  hieh  and  <  '/km  was  over  a  foot,  that 
( 'hou  had  a  wine-lake,  from  whicli  3,000  persons  ！ sucked  lik,、  cattle, 
that  Wen  Wnng  could  drink  3,000  bumpers  of  wine,  and  ( 'on/win^ 
100  gallons,  and  some  mis-statements  concerning;  the  simplicity  of 
Yao  and  ,、'/'"",  and  tlie  cruelty  of  S/ti/i  Huang  Ti,  and  tries  to  reduce 
them  to  fhe  proper  limits. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  Lun-hcng. 


51 


Book  VIO. 

*26.   Chap.  I.   Ju-tstng       ^  (Exaggerations  of  the  Literati). 

Wong  Ch  ung  goes  on  to  criticise  some  old  traditions:— on  the 
abolition  of  punishments  under  Yao  and  Shun,  uu  tlie  wonderful 
shooting  of  Yang  Yu  Chi  and  llsiung  Ch  U  Tse.  on  the  skill  of  Lu  Pan, 
"n  thing  K  os  attempt  upon  fiJiih  Huang  Tfs  life,  on  the  miracles 
connected  witli  the  Nine  Tripods  of  the  Chou  dynasty,  etc. 

27.   Chap.  II.    YUtsSng 藝 i^f. 

People  are  fond  ('f  the  marvellous  and  of  exaggerations,  in 
witness  whereof  passages  are  quoted  from  the  Shttkittgy  the  Shiking, 
the  Yiliing,  the  Lun-ytt,  and  the  C/iun-ch  iu. 


Book  IX. 

*28.   Chap.  I.  WSn  K'ung 間礼 (Criticisms  on  Confucius). 

The  Confuciani8ts  do  not  dare  to  criticise  tlie  Sages,  although 
tlie  words  of  the  Sajjes  are  not  always  true  and  often  contra- 
dictory. It  is  also,  because  they  do  not  understand  the  difficult 
passages,  and  only  repeat  wliat  the  commentators  have  said.  Wang 
Ch  ung  vindicates  the  right  to  criticise  even  ( 'onfucim.  Such  crit- 
icisms are  neither  immoral  nor  irrational.  They  help  to  bring  out 
the  meaning,  and  lead  to  greater  clearness.  Wang  Ch  ung  then  takes 
up  a  number  of  passages  from  the  Analects  for  discussion,  in  which 
he  discovers  contradictions  or  other  flaws,  but  does  not  criticise 
the  system  of  (km/ucius  or  his  theories  in  general. 

Book  X. 

*29.   Chap.  I.   Fei  Han 非韓 (Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tse). 

Han  Fei  Tse  solely  relies  on  rewards  and  punishments  to  govern 
a  State.  In  his  system  there  is  no  room  for  the  cultivation  of 
virtue.  He  despises  the  literati  as  useless,  and  thinks  the  world 
to  be  so  depraved  and  mean,  tliat  nothing  but  penal  law  can  keep 
it  in  check.  Wang  (h  ung  shows  by  some  examples  taken  from  Han 
Fei  Tses  work  that  this  theory  is  wrong.  Men  of  letters  are  as 
useful  to  the  State  as  agriculturists,  warriors,  and  officials,  for  they 
cultivate  virtue,  preserve  the  true  principles,  and  benefit  the  State 
by  tlie  good  example  they  set  to  the  other  classes. 

4* 


1> 


Digitized  by  Google 


52 


Lun-H^ng:  Introduction. 


*30.   Chap.  II.    T'se  Mhig 刺^ i  (Censures  on  Mencius). 

Wang  Ch  ung  singles  out  such  uttoranees  of  Mencius,  in  which 
accordinj;  to  his  view  liis  reasoning  is  (lefec;tivo,  or  wliich  are  con- 
Hictiog  with  other  dicta  of  the  philosopher. 

Book  XI. 

*31.   Chap.  I.    Tan-t'i/'n 談天 (On  Heaven). 

The  old  lepend  of  tlie  collapse  of  Heaven,  which  was  repaired 
by  Nil  Wa,  when  Kung  hung  had  knocked  、vitli  his  liead  against 
the  "Pillar  of  Heaven,"  is  c"i"rovc*rted，  as  is  Tsott  Yen's  theory 
of  the  existence  of  Nine  Contiiu'iitsi.  Heaven  is  not  nuToly  air, 
but  has  a  body,  ami  the  eartli  is  a  scjuare  raoasurinj;  1 00,000  Li 
in  cither  direction. 

*32.   Chap.  II.   Shuo-jih 說 0   (On  the  Sun). 

A  variety  of  astronomical  (juosti^ns  aro  toucluul.  Wang  C/i  nug 
opposes  llu'  view  that  the  sun  disappean's  in  darkness  during  tin* 
nijrht,  that  the  lengtli  or  shortness  of  the  days  is  caused  by  the 
Yin  and  tlie  Yang,  tlint  the  ^un  rises  from  Fu-mhu/  and  sets  in 
Hsi-liu,  that  at  Yno's  time  ten  suns  appeared,  that  tlu're  is  a  raven 
in  the  sun,  and  a  bare  and  a  toad  in  the  moon.  Heaven  is  not 
high  in  the  south  and  depressed  in  tlie  north,  ！ ior  like  a  reclining 
umbrella,  nor  does  it  ent*%r  into  (»r  revolve  in  the  earth.  Heaven 
is  level  like  earth,  and  the  world  lvin^r  in  the  south-east.  The  sun 
at  noon  is  nearer  than  in  the  iiioruing  or  in  the  evening.  Wany 
('h  ung  further  speaks  on  the  rotation  of  the  sky,  the  sun,  and  the 
tnoon.  on  tlie  substancr  of  tlie  sun  and  the  moon,  on  their  shape, 
the  cause  of  the  eclipses,  meteors,  and  meteorological  phenomena. 

33.   Chap.  III.    Ta-ning 答 
On  the  cunning  and  artful. 

Book  XII. 
34.   Chap.  I.   Ch'Ang-rsai 程材. 

The  diflTeronre  between  scholars  and  officials  is  pointed  out. 
Wang  ( It  muj  stands  ut)  for  the  former,  and  placos  them  higher  than 
tho  officials,  berausf  (hey  arc  oi*  greater  importance  to  the  State. 
丁 lie  people  however  think  more  of  the  officials. 


igitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  Lun-heng. 


53 


35.  Chap.  II.   Liatig-chih 量知. 

The  same  subject  as  treated  in  the  preceding  chapter. 

36.  Chap.  in.   Hsieh-tuan 謝短. 

Men  of  letters  as  well  as  officials  have  their  shortcomings. 
The  former  are  interested  in  antiquity  only,  and  neglect  the  present, 
the  ( 'Kin  and  Han  time.  They  only  know  tlie  Classics,  but  even 
many  questions  concerning  the  age  and  the  origin  of  the  Classics 
they  cannot  answer.  The  officials  know  their  business,  but  often 
cannot  say,  why  they  do  a  thing,  since  they  do  not  possess  the 
necessary  historical  knowledge. 


Book  XIII. 
87.  Chap.  I.  Hsiao-li 効力. 

The  chapter  treats  of  the  faculties  of  tin*  srholars  and  the 
officials,  and  of  their  energy  and  perseverance  displayed  in  diflerent 
departments. 

38.  Chap.  II.   Pieh-Vung 別通. 

There  is  the  same  difrcrence  between  the  learned  and  the 
uncultivated  as  between  the  rich  and  the  poor.  Learning  is  a 
power  and  more  important  than  wealth. 

39.  Chap.  III.   Ch'ao^chi 通 荀. 

There  are  various  degrees  of  learning.  Some  remarks  are 
made  on  the  works  of  several  scholars,  e.  g.  tlie  philosopher  Yang 
Tse  Yfln  and  the  two  historians  Pun. 


Book  XIV. 
40.   Chap.  I.   Chuanff'liu  }|^@. 

Scholars  do  not  strive  for  offire.    As  for  practical  success 
they  are  outrivalled  by  the  officials,  who  are  men  of  business. 

*41.   Clmp.  II.   Han-wm 寒温 (On  Heat  and  Cold). 

Wang  Cli  ung  contests  the  assertion  of  the  [)honomenalists  that 
tliere  is  a  correspondence  between  heat  and  cold  and  the  joy  and 
anger  of  the  sovereign.  He  points  out  that  the  Soutli  is  the  seat 
of  heat,  and  the  North  of  cold.  Moreover  the  temperature  de- 
peutls  on  the  four  seasons  and  the  24  time-periods. 


Digitized  by  Google 


54 


Lun  -  Heng :  Introduction. 


*42.   Chap.  HI.   Ch'im-kao 謎告 (On  Reprimands). 

The  anvants  liold  that  Heaven  reprimands  a  sovereign  whose 
administration  is  bad,  visiting  him  with  calamities.  First  he  causes 
extraordinary  events.  If  the  sovereign  does  not  change  then,  lie 
sends  down  misfortunes  upon  his  people,  and  at  last  he  punishes 
his  own  person.  Heaven  is  represented  like  a  prince  governing 
his  people.  These  heavenly  punishments  would  be  at  variance 
with  Heaven's  virtue,  which  consists  in  spontaneity  and  inaction. 
Heaven  does  not  act  itself,  it  acts  through  man,  and  speaks 
tlirough  the  moutlis  of  the  Sages,  in  whose  hearts  is  ingrafted  its 
virtue.  The  utterances  «f  the  Classics  ascribing  human  qualities 
to  Heaven  are  only  intended  to  give  more  weight  to  those  teach- 
ings, and  to  frighten  the  wicked  and  the  unintelligent. 

Book  XV. 

*43.   Chap.  I.   Pien-tung 變 動 (Phenomenal  Changes). 

Heaven  influences  things,  but  is  not  affected  by  them.  All 
creatures  being  filled  with  the  heavenly  fluid,  Heaven  is  the  master, 
and  not  the  servant.  The  Yang  and  the  Yin  move  things,  but  are 
not  moved.  The  deeds  and  the  prayers  of  a  tiny  creature  like 
man  cannot  impress  the  mighty  fluid  of  Heaven,  and  the  sobs  of 
thousands  of  people  cannot  touch  it.  Heaven  is  too  far,  and  its 
fluid  shapeless  without  beginning  or  end.  It  never  sets  the  laws 
of  nature  aside  for  man's  sake. 

44.  Chap.  II.   Chao-chih 招致. 
(This  chapter  has  been  lost.) 

45.  Chap.  III.   Ming-yil 明^ :. 

The  rain  sacrifice,  which  during  the  (  It  nn-ch  iu  period  was 
performed  at  times  of  drought,  forms  the  subject  of  tin's  essay. 
People  use  to  pray  for  rain  and  happiness,  as  they  implore  tl"、 
spirits  to  avert  sickness  and  other  evils.  Some  believe  tliat  rain 
is  caused  by  the  stars,  others  that  it  depends  on  tin*  government 
of  a  State,  others  again  that  it  comes  I'rom  the  mountains.  Tlie 
last  opinion  is  shared  by  Wang  Ch  ung. 

46.  Chap.  IV.   Shun-ku 順鼓. 

The  chapter  treats  of  the  religious  ceremonies  perlorined  to 
avert  inuuthitious,  in  wliicli  the  beating  of  drums  is  vt-ry  important. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  ContouU  of  the  Luii-heng. 


55 


Book  XVI. 
47.   Chap.  I.  Luan-lung 亂龍. 

As  a  means  to  attract  the  rain  by  the  sympathetic  action  of 
similar  fluids  Twig  Chung  Shu  had  put  up  a  clay  dragon.  Wangi 
Ch'uny  attempts  to  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  tins  procedure  by 
15  argumeuts  and  4  analogies. 

48.   Chap.  II.    Tsao-hu 遭虎. 

Wang  Ch'wiff  controverts  the  popular  belief  that,  when  men 
are  devoured  by  tigers,  it  is  the  wickedness  of  secretaries  and  minor 
officials  which  causes  these  disasters. 

49.   Chap.  III.   Shang-ch'ung 商虫. 

The  common  belief  that  the  eating  of  the  grain  by  insects 
is  a  consequence  of  the  covetousuess  of  the  yamen  underlings  is 
shown  to  be  futile. 

*50.    Chap.  IV.    Chiang-jut  講端  (Arguments  on  Ominous 

-  Creatures). 

Wang  Ck  ung  denies  that  the  literati  would  be  able  to  re- 
cognise a  phcBnix  or  a  unicorn,  should  they  appear,  nor  would  they 
know  a  sage  either.  The  phcrnix  and  the  unicorn  are  regarded 
as  holy  animals  aud  as  lucky  auguries.  The  old  traditions  about 
their  appearance  at  various  times  and  their  shape,  which  are  very 
conflicting,  are  discussed.  Wang  Ck' ung  holds  that  these  animals  do 
not  only  appear  at  the  time  oi'  universal  peace,  that  as  ominous 
creatures  they  are  born  of  a  propitious  fluid,  and  do  not  belong 
to  a  certain  species,  but  may  grow  from  dissimilar  parents  of  a 
comiuou  species  of  animals. 

Book  XVII. 
51.   Chap.  I.   Chih-jui 指端. 

The  discussion  ou  the  plicpnix  and  the  unicorn  is  continued. 
Waiig  Ch  ung  impugns  the  opinion  that  these  animals  are  not  born 
in  China,  but  come  from  abroad,  when  there  is  a  wise  emperor. 
They  grow  in  China,  even,  when  there  is  uo  sage. 


Digitized  by  Google 


56  Lun-Ufng:  Introduction. 

52.   Chap.  II.   SfUh-ying 是應. 

TliiH  chapter  treats  of  the  various  lucky  omens  of  the  Golden 
Age:  thi*  purple  bolctUH,  the  wine  springs,  the  sweet  dew,  the 
C/iinff  Htar,  the  montlily  plant,  the  pha*nix,  the  unicorn,  and  of 
Home  <tt\uT  fabulous  animalM. 


53.    Chap.  III.    Chih-ch'i 治期. 

The  praiw  of  antiquity,  its  high  virtue  and  happiness  is  un- 
founded.   Tlicre  is  nothing  hut  fate.    Human  activity  is  jiowerleas. 


Book  XVIII. 

•54.   Chap.  I.    Tse-jan  g 然 (Spontaneity). 

Heaven  emits  ita  geuerating  fluid  spontaneously,  not  on  pur- 
pose. It  Iia8  no  desires,  no  knowledge,  and  does  not  act.  These 
(jualitieH  rtMpjire  organs: ― a  mouth,  ey**s,  hands,  etc.,  which  it 
d(»e8  not  |»osse»a.  Its  body  mu8t  be  eitlier  like  that  of  Earth,  or 
air.  Ileaw'ii'H  fluid  iu  placid,  clesireless,  and  unbusied.  This  spon- 
taneity iH  a  'J'aoint  tl"，()ry，  but  they  did  not  sufficiently  substantiate 
it.  Only  Sagea  re«« 川 bling  1 1  raven  can  be  quite  spontaneous  and 
inactive,  otlicra  must  act,  and  can  be  instructed.  Originally  men 
lived  iu  u  ha])|>y  state  of  ignorance.  Customs,  laws,  in  short 
culture  is  already  a  decline  of  virtue. 

55.   Chap.  II.   Kan-lei 感類. 

Natural  calamities  and  unlu<*ky  events  are  not  tlie  upshot  of 
liuinan  guilt,  as  a  thundersturni  is  not  a  mauilestatioa  of  Heaven's 
auger. 

*.r)0.   Clmp.  III.    Ch'i-shi/i 齊世 (Tl»e  Ecjuality  of  tlio  Ages). 

People  of  old  were  not  better,  nor  stronger,  taller  or  longer 
lived  tlmu  at  present.  Heaven  ami  Kartli  have  remained  tlut  uame, 
and  their  creatures  likewise.  There  is  a  periodical  alternation  of 
proMjierity  and  (iecline  in  all  the  ages.  Tlu;  present  time  is  not 
inferior  lo  antiquity,  but  the  literati  extol  the  pa«t  ami  disparage 
the  present.  Even  sages  like  G""fiu、""  would  m,t  find  favour  witli 
""'m，  if  1  lioy  liappened  to  live  now.  And  yet  the  I  hit  tlyua.sty  is 
quite  equal  to  the  iuiuous  old  dynabtica. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  huu  -  hrng. 


57 


Book  XIX. 

57.   Chap.  I.   IMuin  Han 宣漢. 

Tlie  scholars  hold  that  in  olden  days  there  has  been  a  Golden 
Age,  whicli  ia  passed  and  does  nut  come  back  owing  to  the  bad- 
ness of  the  times.  Wang  Ch  ung  stands  up  for  iiis  own  time,  the 
Han  epoch.  He  enumerates  the  lucky  portents  observed  under  the 
Han  emperors,  and  refers  to  the  great  a<;bieveinents  of  the  Han 
dy nasty  in  the  way  of  colonising  and  civilising  savage  countries. 

.58.  Chap.  II.   Hui-kuo 恢國. 

Wang  Ch  ung  gives  to  the  Han  dynasty  the  preference  over 
all  the  others,  and  again  discoureps  on  the  lucky  auguries  marking 
its  reign. 

59.  Chap.  III.   a/u 驗符. 

The  discovery  of  gold  under  the  Hun  dynasty,  and  of  purple 
boletus,  the  sweet-dew-fall  in  several  districts,  and  the  arrival  of 
tlragou8  and  phrenixes  are  put  forward  as  bo  many  proofs  of  the 
excellence  of  the  Han  dynasty. 

Book  XX. 

60.  Chap.  I.  Hsii-sung 須頌. 
This  chapter  ia  a  variation  of  the  two  preceding. 

61.   Chap.  II.   Yi-wen 佚文. 

The  subject  of  this  treatise  is  purely  literary.  It  discusses 
the  discovery  of  the  Classics  in  the  liouse  of  Conjucimf,  the  Burning 
of  the  Books  under  Ui  in  Shih  Huang  Ti,  and  the  literature  of  the 
Hati  epoch,  of  which  several  authors  are  mentioned. 

*62.   Chap.  III.   Lun-sse 諭死 (On  Death). 

Man  is  a  creature.  .Since  other  creatures  do  not  become 
gliosU  after  death,  man  caunot  become  a  ghost  either.  If  all  the 
millions  that  have  lived,  became  spirits,  there  would  not  be  suffi- 
cient room  for  all  spirits  in  the  world.  The  dead  never  give 
any  sign  of  there  existence,  therefore  they  cannot  exist  any  more. 
The  vital  fluid  l'< inning  the  soul  disperses  at  death,  how  C(»uld  it 


Digitized  by  Google 


58 


Lun-Heng:  Introduction. 


become  a  ghost.  A  spirit  is  tliffuse  and  formless.  Before  its  birth 
the  soul  forms  part  "1'  the  primogcuial  fluid,  which  is  unconscious. 
When  at  death  it  reverts  thereto,  it  becomes  unconscious  again. 
The  soul  rcijuires  the  body  to  become  conscious  and  to  act.  If 
sleep  causes  unconsciousness,  and  if  a  disease  disorganises  the  mind, 
death  must  do  the  same  in  a  still  higher  degree. 

Book  XXI. 

*63.   Chap.  I.   Sse-wei 死偽 (False  Reports  about  the  Dead). 

A  number  of  ghost  stories  are  quoted  from  the  Tso-chtmn  and 
other  uiuMent  works,  where  discontented  spirits  are  reported  to  liave 
taken  tlieir  revenge  upon,  and  killed  their  enemies.  Wang  C It  wig 
either  reje<:U  these  atones  as  inventions,  or  tries  to  explain  them 
in  a  natural  way. 

Book  XXII. 

*G4.   Chap.  I.    Chi-yao 紀妖 (Spook  Stories). 

Several  spook  and  gliost  stories  recorded  in  the  Shi-chi  and 
the  Tao-chiuin  are  analysed.  Wang-  ( A  uny  explains  them  in  acttord- 
ance  with  his  theory  on  the  spontaneity  of  Heaven,  and  on  the 
uature  of  apparitions  and  portents. 

*65.   Chap.  II.    Ting-kuei 訂鬼 (All  about  Ghosts). 

Wang  Ch  uny  sets  forth  the  dilTereat  opinions  on  the  nature 
of  ghosts,  propounded  at  liis  time.  Some  hold  that  ghosts  are 
visions  of  sick  people,  or  the  fluid  of  sicklier.  Others  regard  tliein 
hs  the  stellar  fluid,  or  as  the  essence  of  old  creatures,  or  as  t\\e 
spirits  of  cyclical  signs.  After  an  excursion  on  the  demous,  devils, 
and  goblins  mentioned  in  ancient  b(»oks,  Wang  Vh  ung  gives  his  owu 
views,  according  to  w  Inch  ghosts  are  apparitions  and  pliantoms 
foreboding  evil,  wliiuli  have  assumed  human  form,  but  are  only 
scinl)lanc»'x  and  disembodied.  They  consist  of  the  solar  fluid,  the 
Yang,  arc  therefore  red,  burning,  and  to  a  certain  extent  poisonous. 

Book  XXIU. 
*(>6.   Ch.ip.  I.   Ym-tu  言森 (On  Poison). 

Aniuial  and  vegetable  poison  is  the  hot  air  of  the  sun.  All 
beings  filled  with  tlie  solar  fluid  contain  some  poison.  Snakes, 
scorpions,  and  soiiu*  plants  liave  plenty  of  it.  Ghosts,  、vli",li  ronsist 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  <jf  l he  Luu - lu'ng.  59 

of  the  pure  solar  fluid,  are  burning  p"isoii，  wliich  eventually  kills. 
There  is  poison  in  some  (list'aMes,  in  a  sun-stroke  for  instance  and  in 
lumbago.  Want/  ( h  utig  discovers  real  poison  in  spcei'li,  in  beauty,  ami 
in  several  tastes,  wliich  only  inctaphoi  ically  might  be  called  poisouous, 
anil  mixes  up  tho  subject  still  more  by  improper  symbolism. 

67.   Chap.  II.   P(htsang 薄葬. 
This  chapter  is  directed  against  the  extravagance  in  funerals, 
on  the  score  that  the  dead  have  no  benefit  from  it. 

(>8.  Cliap.  III.  Sse-wei 刚韋. 
There  is  a  popular  belief  that  four  things  are  dangerous 
and  bring  misfortune  riz.  to  enlaqfe  a  house  at  the  west  side,  to 
allow  a  banished  man  to  a^cenil  n  tumulus,  the  intercourse  witli 
women,  during  the  first  month  after  they  have  given  birth  to  a 
child,  and  the  rearing  of  children  born  in  the  1st  and  the  5th  months, 
wlio  will  cause  the  deaths  of  their  parents.  Wang  Ch  ung  combats 
these  superstitions. 

09.   Chap.  IV.   Lan-shih 誠時. 
Wang  Cti'ung  discoureos  on  the  common  belief  that  in  building 
one  must  pay  attention  to  an  uupmpitious  time,  which  luay  l)t« 
warded  off  hy  amulets.    He  further  speaks  of  the  spirits  of  ttie 
year,  the  months,  etc. 

Book  XXIV. 

70.   Chap.  I.   Chi-jtfi 識 0  . 

Some  more  superstitions  conrerning  unlucky  years,  months, 
and  days,  wliich  must  be  slmnne<l  to  avoid  misfortunes,  are  in- 
vestigated. For  nmnv  actions  the  election  of  a  proper  tim»>  is 
deemed  to  he  of  great  importance,  r.  g.  for  a  funeral,  or  for  com- 
mencing a  building.  Bathing  on  certain  days,  women  become  beau- 
tiful; bathing  on  others  makes  their  hair  turn  wliito.  On  tlie  day 
of  T mng  I Isuh's  deatli.  \vlu>  invented  writing,  one  must  not  study 
calligraphy,  and  on  the  day  of  the  downfall  of  the  Yin  and  Hsia 
dynasties  one  does  not  make  music. 

*71.   Chap.  II.   Pu-shih  |、 楚 (On  Divination). 
People   ol'ren   negl<M?t   virtue  and   only  rely  on  divination. 
Tlioy  imagiiu!  tliat  by  means        lortni.se  shells  and  inilfoiL  tliey 


Digitized  by  Google 


60 


Lun-H^ng:  Introdactiou. 


can  interrogate  Heaven  and  Earth  about  the  future,  and  that  they 
reply  by  tlie  signs  of  the  shells  and  the  straws.  Wang  Ch  ung 
shows  that  such  an  opinion  is  erroneous,  but,  whereas  Han  Fei  Tse 
condemns  divination  altogether,  he  upholds  this  science.  In  his 
idea  visions,  signs,  and  omens  are  true  by  all  means,  only  they 
are  very  often  misunderstood  or  misinterpreted  by  the  diviners. 
The  lucky  will  meet  with  good  omens,  which,  however,  are  not  the 
response  of  Heaven,  but  happen  by  chance. 

*72.  Chap. III.  Pien-sui 辨 j^-  (Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences). 

Most  people  are  under  the  delusion  that  by  disregarding  an 
unpropitious  time  pis.  years,  months,  aud  days  of  dread,  tliey  will 
have  to  suffer  from  noxious  influences,  falling  in  with  evil  spirits, 
which  work  disaster.  This  is  an  error,  as  shown  by  experience, 
but  boroscopists  and  seers  are  silent  on  all  cases  contradicting  their 
theory.  A  vast  literature  has  sprung  up  on  this  subject,  and  the 
princes  dare  not  take  any  important  step  in  lii'e,  any  more  than 
their  people,  without  reference  to  it. 

73.  Chap.  IV.  Nan-mi 難歲. 

Wang  Cliung  impugns  the  view  that  by  moving  one's  residence 
oue  may  come  iuto  collision  with  the  Spirit  of  the  North  Point, 
Nan  Sui、  which  would  be  disastrous. 

Book  XXV. 
74.   Chap.  I.   Ch'i-shu 酷術. 

The  chapter  treats  of  the  precautions  which  used  to  be  taken 
in  building  houses,  special  attention  being  paid  to  the  family  name, 
the  number  of  the  house,  the  situation,  etc. 

*75.   Chap.  II.    Chieh-ch'u 解除 (On  Exorcism). 

Hy  exorcism  malignant  spirits  are  expelled  after  having  been 
feasted.  Exorcism  and  conjurations  are  of  no  use,  for  either  would 
the  ghosts  not  yield  to  the  force  employed  against  them,  and  resent 
the  affront,  or,  if  they  are  like  mist  and  clouds,  their  expulsion 
would  be  use  loss.  In  ancient  times,  sickness  was  expelled  in  this 
way.  Tlu*  propitiation  oi'  the  Spirit  of  Earth,  al'ler  having  dug  up 
the  ground,  is  also  useless,  for  Earth  does  not  hear  man  nor 
understand  his  speech.    All  depends  upon  man,  not  on  ghosts. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Coutentfl  of  the  Lun  -  hcng* 


61 


*76.   Chap.  III.   Sse-yi      義 (Sacrifices  to  the  Departed). 

Sacrifices  are  merely  manifestations  of  the  feelings  of  love 
ami  gratitude,  which  the  living  cherisli  towards  gliosts  and  spirits. 
The  latter  cannot  enjoy  the  sacrifices,  which  are  presented  to  tliem, 
because  having  no  body,  they  are  devoid  of  knowledge  and  can- 
not eat  or  drink.  If  Heaven  and  Earth  could  eat  or  drink,  they 
would  require  such  enormous  quantities  of  food,  that  man  could 
never  appease  their  hunger.  Wang  Ch  ung  treats  of  the  nature  of 
ghosts,  and  refers  to  the  aacTificos  to  Heaven  aud  Earth,  to  the 
House,  to  the  Gods  of  Wind,  Rain,  anil  Thunder,  to  the  8un,  the 
Moon,  and  the  Stars,  and  to  the  Ancestors. 

*77.    Chap.  IV.  祭意 (Sacrifices). 

The  various  old  sacrifices  are  described,  those  to  Heaven  and 
Earth,  to  the  Mountains  and  Rivers,  to  the  Spirits  of  the  Land 
and  Grain,  to  tlie  Six  Superior  Powers,  to  the  Seasons,  Heat  and 
Cold.  Water  and  Drought,  the  Hain  Sac ri lice,  those  t"  the  Four 
Cardinal  Points,  to  the  Sun.  the  Moon,  and  the  Stars,  the  Five 
Genii  of  the  House,  and  to  the  Ancestors.  All  these  sacrifices 
saving  the  last  were  State  sarri fires  and  reserved  lor  the  emperor, 
tlie  feudal  princes,  «ind  their  officials.  They  are  thank-offerings  for 
kindness  received.  There  are  no  spirits  present  to  enjoy  them,  nor 
can  they  bestow  happiness  on  the  sacrificers,  or  visit  with  mis- 
fortune those  who  neglect  them.  Therefore  sacrifices  are  a  beau- 
tiful custom,  but  of  no  great  consequence. 

Book  XXVI. 

78.   Chap.  I.   Shih-rhih 寶知. 

Saints  and  Sages  are  credited  witli  an  extraonlinary  know- 
ledge. They  need  not  learn  or  study,  for  tliey  are  cognisant  of 
everything  intuitively,  and  know  fhc  past  as  well  as  the  future. 
This  is  a  fallacy.  There  are  no  supernatural  faculties,  and  even 
those  of  the  Sages  follow  the  natural  laws. 

79.  Chap.  II.   CWW/"7' 知寶. 

Confucius  was  not  prescient  and  not  a  prophet,  as  hsus  beon 
assorted.  16  examples  an*  given,  all  showing  his  inability  to  fore- 
know the  future. 


Digitized  by  CiOOgle 


62 


Lun-Henp:  Introduction. 


Book  XXVII. 
80.   Chap.  I.    Tiny-hsien 定賢. 

The  nature  of  the  Worthies  is  defined.  Examples  are  ad- 
duced of  what  tliey  arc  not.  No  exceptional  talents  arc  requirotl, 
but  a  certain  amount  of  intelb'geuce  and  honesty.  Worthies  belong 
to  the  same  class  as  Saints  or  Sages,  but  are  somewhat  inferior. 

Book  XXVm. 

*81.   Chap.  I.   Chmg-shuo 正說 (Statements  Corrected). 

This  chapter  contains  critical  remarks  on  the  composition 
and  the  history  of  the  Shuking,  the  Shikiny,  the  Ch'un-chtiti,  the 
Yiking,  the  Liki,  and  the  Ancd*vts.  The  meaning  of  the  dynastic 
names  of  Tang,  Yfl.  the  Ihia,  Yin,  and  C/iou  dynaaties  is  explained, 
and  some  hints  as  to  how  the  Canons  are  to  be  interpreted  are 
added. 

82.   Chap.  II.   Shu-chu>h 書 解. 

The  chapter  deals  with  learning  and  erudition,  with  literary 
composition,  and  with  the  various  kinds  of  men  of  letters. 

Book  XXIX. 

*83.    Chap.  I.    An-shu  案書 (Critical  Remarks  on  Various 

Hooks). 

Wang  Ch  ung  criticises  tlic  famous  authors  of  his  time  and 
their  works,  beginniug  with  some  writers  of  the  Chou  epoch.  He 
finds  fault  with  Mi  Ti,  the  sophist  Kitng  Sun  Lung,  and  the  specu- 
lative philosopher  Ts<m  Yen.  and  commends  Tso  Cli  iu  Ming,  the 
author  of  the  Tso-chuin  and  the  Ktto-t/il.  He  speaks  witli  great 
respect  of  the  historians  Sse  Ma  Cliim  and  Pan  Ku,  the  pliilosopher 
Yang  Tse  Yiln,  and  Li"  Hsiang,  ami  in  the  highest  terms  of  Lu 
Chia,  wlio  published  the  Cli  nn-ch' iu-fan-lu,  and  of  Il'ian  Chiin  Shan 
and  lluan  K  uan,  tlie  authors  of  the  Hsin-lun  and  the  Yeu-t  ieh-lun. 

•84.   Chap.  II.    Tui-tso 對作 (Roplies  in  Self-Defence). 

Wang  <  ft  uny  gives  the  reasons,  why  he  wrote  his  principal 
works,  the  Lun-Ung  and  the  Cl^ny-uu,  a  Treatise  on  government. 
In  the  Lun-heug  he  wishes  to  explain  common  errors,  to  point  out 


Digitized  by  Google 


Table  of  Contents  of  the  Lun-hpng. 


03 


the  exaggerations  and  inventions  in  literature,  and  thus  deliver 
mankind  of  its  prejudices.  The  Lun-h^ng  weighs  tlie  words  and 
holds  up  a  balance  for  truth  and  false h<iod.  Wang  Ck ring  shows 
the  advantage  winch  miglit  be  derived  i'roin  di flfcront  (rliaj)tere? 
and  meets  tl»e  objections*  whicli  his  opponents  would  perhaps  raiso. 

Book  XXX. 

*85.   Chap.  I.    Tse-chi 自杀已 (Autobiography). 

Wang  Ch  ung  is  a  native  of  S/tang-i/fl-f^ien  in  Chekuing.  His 
family  originally  lived  in  Chihli.  He  was  born  in  a.v.  27,  and  already 
as  a  boy  was  very  fond  of  study.  In  liis  oflu-ial  cuvor  lie  was 
not  very  successful.  Tli,'  highest  post  which  In-  held  about  \.n.  86 
was  that  of  n  sub-j)rclVct.  Tho  equanimity  of  a  j)hiloso|)lier  lu'lp«'(l 
him  ovvt  many  disappointments.  His  ideal  whs  to  poxwss  an  ex- 
tensive knowledg*'.  a  keen  intolloct.  and  n  noble  mind.  Besides  liis 
<-hief  work  the  Jjun-hnig,  In-  wrote  12  diapters  on  common  morals 
in  a  plain  and  oasy  style,  and  a  treatise  u  Mrurnbiotics "  in  a.d.  91. 
Ho  defends  the  style,  the  voluminonsness,  and  the  contents  of  the 
Lun-yng  against  the  attacks  diret-ted  against  it. 


igitized  by  Google 


64 


Lun-Heng. 

Selected  Kssays  of  the  Philosopher  Wang  Ch'ung. 

CHAPTER  I. 
Autobiography  {T.se-chi). 

Wang  Ch  ung  is  a  native  of  Shanff-i/il-hsieri 1  in  K'uei-chi9.  His 
style  is  Chung  J4n.  His  family  hails  from  Ytum-ch  ^ng3  in  the  WW* 
circuit.  Oiu*  of  his  clan,  Sun-t/i,  served  wliole  life  as  a  soldier, 
and  distinguished  himself  so  ini"'li，  that  ho  was  appoiutod  warden 
of  the  southern  part  of  K  uei~d"、  but,  wlien  one  year  a  disturbance 
broke  out,  which  disorganised  the  State,  lie  continued  to  reside 
there,  and  became  a  farmer  and  cultivator  of  mulberry-trees. 

His  givat  grand- father  was  ven*  bold  and  violent,  and,  when 
in  a  passion,  care«l  for  nobody.  In  a  yoar  of  dearth  he  behaved 
like  a  rufHaii,  and  wounded  and  killed  people.  Those  whom  he 
had  wronged,  and  who  wtM'e  waiting  lor  an  opportunity  to  wreak 
their  ven^eaiicr,  were  very  numerous.  As  in  K  uei-chi  revolts  were 
of  constant  orLMirrence,  and  thero  was  danger  tbat  his  enemies  would 
seize  upon  him,  the  grand-father  Fan  removed  liis  family  and  his 
household  from  K  tu'i-c/ii,  and  settled  in  ( '/t  ten -t  ntig-hsien , 5  where 
he  lived  as  a  merclhint.  He  had  two  sons,  tlie  elder  was  called 
M^ng,  the  younger  Sung.    Sung  is  the  father  of  Wang  Ch  wig. 

The  grand-father  had  a  violent  temper,  which  in  liis  sons, 
Mt'ng  and  Sung,  became  so  intense,  that  many  people  iu  Ch' ien-t  ang 
bad  to  suffer  from  their  vehemence.  At  last  they  became  involved 
a^ain  in  a  feud  with  Ttng  Po  and  other  influential  families,  in  rmi- 
se<iucnee  of  whicli  tliev  emigrated  witli  their  families  to  Shanff-ifil. 

In  the  third  year  of  (,7〃'''n-"'〃,,！  Wang  Cltung  was  born.  When 
playing  with  liis  companions,  he  disliked  all  frivolous  games,  [lis 
comrades  would  out  rap  birds,  catch  cicadas,  play  for  money,  and 
gambol  on  stilts.  Wang  Ch  ung  alone  declined  to  take  part  in  their 
games  to  the  great  amazement  of  liis  father. 

1  In  Shao-hsing-J'u  (l  hrkiang). 

， Under  the  Han  dynasty  K'uei-chi  comprises  Chrkiang,  the  South  of  Anhui, 

and  the  North  of  Fukicn. 

8  In  Ta-imng-fu  (Chili). 

4  A  circuit  comprising  parts  of  (  Ai/i  and  Honan. 

&  In  the  Hang-chm  prefecture  of  <  hrkianp. 

•  27  A.D. 


igitized  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


65 


At  the  age  of  six,  he  received  bis  first  instruction,  and  learned 
to  behave  with  politeness,  honesty,  benevolence,  obedience,  pro- 
priety, and  reverence.  He  was  grave,  earnest,  and  very  quiet,  and 
had  the  will  of  a  great  man.  His  father  never  flogged  him,  his 
mother  never  gave  him  a  harsh  word,  and  the  neighbours  never 
scolded  him.  When  he  was  eight  years  old,  he  went  to  school. 
There  were  over  one  hundred  small  boys  in  this  school.  As  a 
punishment  for  faults  committed  they  used  to  be  stripped,  or  were 
\vhippe<l  for  bad  writing.  Wang  Ch'nng  made  daily  progress,  and 
never  committed  any  offence. 

When  he  could  write  sentenres,  his  teacher  explained  to  him 
the  Analects  and  the  Shuking,  of  wliich  he  daily  read  a  thousand 
characters.  Wlien  be  knew  tlie  Classics,  and  liis  virtue  had  tlius 
been  doveloped,  lie  left  his  "'aclier,  and  devoted  his  private  studies 
to  writing  and  composing  so,  tliat  every  one  was  astonished,  and 
the  extent  of  his  reading  widened  day  by  day.  But  lie  did  not 
make  bad  use  of  his  talents,  and  though  lie  possessed  gn-at  dia- 
lectical skill,  lie  was  not  fond  of  disputations.  Unless  he  found 
the  proper  audience,  he  did  not  speak  the  whole  day.  His  speech 
、vas  quaint  and  not  like  that  of  others,  but  thdsc  who  listoncd  to 
him  to  the  end,  agreed  with  him.  Such  were  also  the  productions 
of  his  pen,  and  so  were  liis  conduct,  and  liis  behaviour  towards 
his  superiors. 

In  a  district  he  rose  to  the  rank  of  a  secretary,  and  held  the 
same  office  in  the  department  of  a  military  governor.  In  a  pre- 
fecture he  was  one  of  the  five  chief  secretaries,1  and  in  a  depart- 
ment be  was  appointed  assistaut- magistrate.  He  did  not  strive  for 
fame,  and  did  not  regulate  his  conduct  in  accordance  with  his  per- 
sonal profits.  He  always  spoke  of  people's  merits  and  seldom  of 
their  faults.  Those  who  had  not  yet  got  on  in  their  career,  were 
specially  recommended  hy  him,  antl  he  exposed  ouly  the  faults  of 
those  who  had  secured  a  position.  When  he  thought  anything  wrong, 
he  did  not  praise  it,  and  when  a  fault  was  not  (lone  away  with, 
he  did  not  again  condemn  the  man.  Tie  could  pardon  the  great 
faults  of  a  man,  and  also  pitied  liis  minor  mistakes.  His  desire 
was  to  be  unimpeachal)le  himself,  but  he  did  not  wish  to  shine. 
He  endeavoured  to  base  his  claims  on  n*cogni<ion  upon  his  actions, 
and  was  ashamed  to  presume  upon  his  talents. 


1  A  prefecture  or  a  circuit ― of  which  there  were  36  during  the  Han  epoch  - - 
waa  devided  into  5  regions  ： ― the  centre  and  four  quarters.  Each  region  was  super- 
intended by  a  chief  secretary  of  the  prefect,  who  had  the  jurisdiction  o\cr  his  r''gioii. 

LuutJrog.  5 


Digitized  by  Google 


66 


Lun-Heng:  A.  Biographical. 


In  public  meetings  lie  did  not  speak,  unless  he  was  asked, 
and  in  the  prcsoru'**  of  princes  and  generals  he  only  replied,  wIkmi 
he  was  addressed.  In  the  country  lie  attempted  to  follow  the  example 
of  Chil  Po  V 'ft, 1  and  in  the  court  he  wished  to  iniitnte  S/ti/i  Tsf  Yi}.- 

When  insultrd,  he  did  not  white-wash  himself,  and,  when  in 
his  csireer  lie  was  not  promoted,  lie  did  not  feel  grieved.  Although 
he  was  poor  and  had  not  an  acre  to  dwell  upon,  his  mind  was 
fiver  than  that  of  kings  and  dukes,  and  thougli  he  h;u\  no  otnolu- 
ments  counted  by  pecks  and  piculs,  ho  felt,  as  if  he  liad  ten 
thoiiHaiul  cluing^  to  live  upon.  ()!)taiain^  an  appointment.  Iio  was 
not  overjoyed,  ami  losing  it,  he  did  not  feci  distrcssi'tl.  Me  en- 
joyed a  tranquil  happiness,  but  his  (k'sirt's  did  noi  run  riot.  nn<I 
though  lie  was  living  in  a  state  of  poverty,  his  cuer^v  、v:is  nnt 
broken.  The  study  of  .nncient  literature  was  his  dobauohory,  and 
strange  stories  his  relish.  In  the  i-urrent  books  and  common  sayings 
lie  found  much,  in  wliich  he  could  not  a(juii'siM'.  A  recluse  in  his 
solitary  retirement,  lie  tried  to  find  truth  and  falseliood. 


Wang  Ch'unf/  had  a  pure  and  sterling  character.  He  ma  do 
iriends  wherever  he  went,  hut  did  not  contr;n-(  tlifse  friendships 
carelessly.  The  position  of  his  frit'iuls  mi^lit  l)e  evrr  so  low,  and 
in  years  tliev  nii^ht  be  ever  so  young,  provided  only  that  t hey 
rose  above  common-place  mediocrity,  he  would  scrk  tlu-ir  friend- 
ship, lit'  liad  a  great  admiration  lor  superior  men,  and  liked  to 
associate  witli  distinnuisljed  people,  hut  would  not  liglitly  hocomo 
intimate  with  men  oi'  cominon  gifts.  In  case  these  latter  slandered 
liim  tor  a  slight  fault  or  any  insignificant  mistake,  lie  woiild  not 
i- 1  car  himself  of  those  accusations,  nor  did  he  boar  any  grudge 
against  them. 

1  A  disciple  of  '  onfuriu^,  whom  the  master  esteemed  very  much. 

2  '、'/"•/'  Tse 】'ii  —  —  -、'/"/» 】L  a  high  oCfiocr  in  Wri.  When  Duke  Lin;/  of  、、''》' 
(:>.'53-4!12)  did  not  employ  '  hii  Po  Yu.  Sl"h  Yu  remonstrated  with  the  duke, 
lint  in  vain.  Soon  aftonvards  he  fell  sick.  Feeling  his  end  coming,  he  told  his  sod 
to  i>la«-«  liis  corpse  under  the  window,  without  performing  tlic  usual  funoral  rites, 
bociiuse  he  did  not  deserve  them,  not  Livfii;'  l)<?'>ii  able  to  convince  the  dnkc  of 
what  \va<j  right.  When  tlic  diik<-  [laid  liis  foiidoU'tice,  tlie  son  iiifonneri  liim  of 
wliat  his  (atlier  had  .said.  Tlie  dukt-  rejirntt-d,  nnd  then  appointed  ( hil  ]'o  )  u. 
When  f'o',f"ci".、  lieard  of  tlii.s,  lie  cxrlaiinpd :— •  How  ujiriglit  was  S/ii/i  }'«. 
wlio  still  as  a  corj)se  admonished  his  so\  orcign."  '  hit  I'o  )  u  was  ol'  a  differom 
turn  ol'  iiiiiul.  <  saiil  of  him  tliat,  wlion  bad  govornmrnt  prevaileil.  Iio  could 
roll  his  |uiiicij)l«'>  up,  and  kt-ep  lliein  in  liis  breast.    (An  a  ted"  XV，  0.) 

i  0:"'  fining  =  4  pecks. 


Digitized  by  Go( 


Autobiography.  67 

Some  one  might  ask,  why  a  man  of  remarkable  gifts  and 
extraordinary  literary  talent  should  not  defend  himself  against  false 
incriminations.  Yn"g  Sh^ng  and  others  were  foul-mouthed  and  glib- 
tonguod;  lmt  T.soxt  Yang  vindicated  liimself  and  came  out  of  jail 
again. 1  \V hen  a  man's  conduct  is  perfect,  people  should  not  at- 
tempt to  find  flaws  in  it,  and  when  somebody  exerts  himself  to 
come  to  the  front,  they  should  not  keep  him  down. 

I  reply  that  none  but  the  pure  remark  dust,  and  none  hut 
the  exalted  perceive  tlan^t-rs.  Only  those  living  in  abundance,  feel 
restraints,  and  those  in  opulence  know  what  is  want.  The  scliolara 
at  present  talk  too  much  of  themselvos,  therefore  they  are  slandered 
by  others,  which  is  their  due.  Desirous  to  get  on,  lliey  sliow 
themselves,  aud  resenting  neglect,  they  assert  themselves.  Being  free 
of  these  desires  and  resentments,  I  keep  quiet. 

The  slanders  of  Yang  S/i^ng  were  probably  prompted  l)y  some- 
body, and  when  Tuott  Yang  was  delivered,  sonu*  one  saved  him. 
( 'onfuc'tus  spoke  of  destiuy  and  Menciun  of  heaven.  Luck  and  mishap, 
quietude  and  danger  (lo  not  depend  on  man.  Tlio  anoients  knew 
this,  therefore  they  ascribod  these  things  to  destiny  and  attributed 
them  to  time.  Placid,  tranquil,  and  equaninmus,  fhey  did  not  roin- 
plaia  of  injustice.  When  happiness  came,  tliey  did  not  imagine 
that  they  themselves  had  brought  it  about,  and  when  misfortune 
befell  them,  they  did  not  consider  it  (heir  own  doing;.  When  they 
were  successful,  their  joy  \va«  not  immoderate,  and  when  they 
8uflTered  reverses,  their  courage  did  not  fail  tliem.  Tliey  did  not 
hate  need,  and  therefore  crave  for  plenty,  nor  did  they  brave  dangers 
to  win  peace.  Their  wisdom  i\\v.y  did  not  sell  for  wages,  and  they 
did  not  decline  honours  to  become  famous.  Not  being  bent  on 
success,  they  did  not  try  to  show  oflT,  and  not  resenting  reverses,  they 
did  not  complain  of  otliers.  Tran(|uillity  and  excitement  were  tl"'same 
t<»  tliein,  life  and  death  equal,  luek  and  mishap  identical,  and  victory 
and  defeat  one.  Meeting  even  ten  Yuikj  ,、'/,A'y.v，  thev  would  have  said 
(hat  it  mattered  not;  they  left  everything  to  heaven,  and  therefore  did 
not  wish  to  shine. 


Wang  CTi  ung  was  of  a  cheerful  and  easy-going  tlispositiou, 
and  did  not  strive  for  wealth  and  liouour.  Wln'n  his  superiors 
took  notice  of  him,  and  promoted  him  above  the  heads  of  others, 

1  Tdoh  Yang  lived  under  the  reign  of  Ching  Ti  (156  141  n.c).  At  the  court 
of  King  Htiao  of  Liang  he  was  denounced  l>y  Yamj  Sht'mj  and  others,  and  thrown 
into  prison,  but  by  a  memorial,  whioli  from  his  confinement  he  sent  to  the  king,  he 
obtaiued  his  release,  and  was  re-instated  into  all  his  honours. 


Digitized  by  Google 


6S 


Lon-H^ng:  A.  Biographical. 


he  did  not  cling  to  liis  higli  post,  and,  when  they  ignored,  denounced, 
and  degraded  hira,  lie  did  not  pine  at  }iis  low  rank.  Wlien  in  the 
district  magistrate's  office, 】ie  had  no  ambition  and  no  repugnance. 

Some  one  might  object  that  to  act  like  this  is  easy  enough,  but 
that  tlie  difficulty  lies  with  the  heart.  Meeting  with  congenial 
friends,  scholars  do  uot  care  for  tlie  place,  but  wliose  example  can 
they  follow,  when  they  have  dirty  and  distasteful  business  to  do? 

There  is  no  better  paragon  than  (，onf,tc'ms,  I  should  say.  Con- 
fucius as  an  official  】ia(l  no  aversions.  In  charge  of  the  public  fields 
and  as  keeper  of  the  granaries  lie  was  not  low-spirited,  and  when 
he  was  superintendent  of  works  and  minister,  his  face  was  not 
beaming  with  joy.  S/mn  tilled  tlie  land  on  tlie 丄' •-.«/'"«, 1  as  though 
he  should  continue  to  do  so  for  ever,  and  when  lie  liad  received 
tlie  empire  from  \rao.  he  behaved,  as  if  lie  had  obtained  it  later 
on  as  a  matter  of  course.  We  must  be  sorry  tliat  our  virtue  is 
not  quite  perfect,  but  not  regret  our  humble  rank,  and  we  may 
be  abashed,  if  our  name  is  not  without  blemish,  but  should  not 
feel  chagrined,  because  we  do  not  advance  in  our  career.  Marble 
may  be  kept  in  thf  same  box  with  tiles,  and  moon-stones  in  the 
same  bag  witli  pebbles.  Being  both  of  precious  stuff,  they  are 
not  injured  by  being  mixed  with  other  things  in  the  world.  For 
him  wlio  knows  what  is  good,  good  things  shine  even  in  base 
places,  whereas  to  those  who  caouot  make  these  distinctions,  they 
look  common  even  in  a  prominent  place.  As  long  as  the  deeds  of 
people  in  low  and  high  spheres  can  be  measured,  and  as  the  virtues 
of  men  in  humble  positions,  and  of  uoble  rank  can  be  compared, 
it  is  all  right. 


The  world  courts  those  who  have  been  successful,  and  dis- 
dains those  who  have  failed.  It  hails  the  victor,  and  spurns  tlie 
defeated.  As  long  as  Wang  Ch  ung  was  rising,  and  liolding  rank 
and  office,  all  the  people  swarmed  around  liim  like  ants,  but,  when 
he  liad  lost  his  position  and  was  living  in  poverty,  his  former 
f'rieuds  abandoned  him.  He  pondered  over  the  lieartlcssness  of  (lie 
world  and  in  his  leisure  he  wrote  twelve  chapters  "  Ceiisuros  on 
Common  Moralx  '\-  lioping  that  the  reading  of  these  books  would 
rouse  the  public  conscience.    For  this  purpose  lie  expressly  wrote 

1  It  is  not  certain  where  this  Mount  Li  was  situated.  Various  places  are 
aasigned  to  it. 

a   Chi  m  chieh  yi. 


Autobiography. 


69 


it  in  an  easy,  popular  style.  Should  anybody  condemn  it  as  shal- 
low, I  would  reply  that  if  the  style  of  tlic  Sacred  Institutions 1 
be  employed  for  the  Lesser  Odes,3  or  if  an  elegant  speech  be  ad- 
drtssed  to  rustics,  they  would  not  understand  anything,  and  there- 
ftire  not  agree.  Thus  Su  Ch  in3  spoke  very  elegantly  in  Cltao,  but 
Li  I'ui  was  not  encliaotcd  at  all.  Shang  Yang 4  spoke  in  (■•/'■，•"，  as 
ii'  ho  had  addressed  au  emperor,  but  Duke  Hsiao6  did  nut  follow 
liis  advice.  If  no  attention  be  paid  to  the  individuality  and  in- 
clinations of  the  hearers,  one  may  exhaust  the  eloquence  of  Yao 
and  Shun,  it  would  be  like  giving  an  ox  wine  to  drink  and  feeding 
a  horse  on  preserved  meat.  A  refined,  rhetorical,  and  scientific  style 
is  fit  for  the  upper  classes  of  society,  but  out  of  plaw  i'or  small- 
minded  people.  It  liappens  very  seldom,  that  those  who  must 
hear  something  nolens  tolens,  take  it  to  heart. 

When  Cotifuciwt  had  lost  a  horse  in  the  country,  the  country- 
people  locked  it  up,  and  did  not  return  it.  J'se  Kung  spoke  to  them 
in  well  turned  sentences,  but  only  made  them  angry,  but  when 
the  groom  addressed  them  in  u  fainilar,  jocular  toue,  they  re- 
lented." 

T«>  use  liigh-flown  expressions  at  all  i-ostjs  instead  of  the  plain 
and  sioiple  language  of  the  people  is  like  mixing  au  elixir,  as  the 
spirits  use,  to  cure  a  cold  or  a  cough,  and  to  put  on  a  fur-coat  of 
sable  or  fox  to  fetch  firewood  or  vegetables.  As  regards  propriety, 
a  thing  is  often  out  of  place,  and  many  an  action  is  often  better 
left  undone.  To  give  a  derision,  and  understaud  a  grievance,  one 
must  not  be  a  Kao  Yao,1  and  to  cook  sunflower-seed  and  onions, 
no  Yi  TP  or  17  Y'a 9  is  required.  lu  a  side-allt*y  one  does  not 
play  the  music  of  S/ntn  and  Wn,  and  to  tlie  Village  Mother 10 
one  does  not  sacrifice  a  whole  ox.  What  is  unnecessary,  is  also 
inadequate. 


1  Parts  of  the  Shi-king. 

， The  minor  odes  of  the  Shi-king. 

s  A  politician  of  the  4th  cent.  b.c.  (Cf.  Chap.  XXXVII.) 

*  Vid.  p.  171,  Note  2. 

6  Duke  Hsiao  of  (  'Kin,  301-3.37  b.c. 

*  Tliis  adventure  is  related  by  Hani  Nan  T«e  (quoted  in  the  Pei-icen-yiin-fu) 
likewise,  who  adds  that  the  hor»e  of  ( 'onjuchis  was  retained  by  the  peasants,  because 
it  had  eaten  their  corn. 

7  A  minister  of  Shun. 

*  Yi  Ti,  tho  inventor  of  wine,  who  presented  the  first  enp  to  Great  YA. 

9  Yi  i'a，  the  famous  cook  of  Duke  Huan  of  t'A  i,  7th  cent.  b.c.  (Cf.  Mmciut, 
Bk.  VI，  Pt.  I,  chap.  7,  Leggt  Vol.  U,  p.  281.) 

10  The  matron-saint  of  a  village. 


Digitized  by  Google 


70 


Lun  -  H^ng :  A.  Biographical. 


To  carve  a  fowl  w  ith  a  butclicr's  knil'y,  to  rrap  sun-flowers  witli 
a  S/ni 1  spear,  to  cut  chop-stieks  with  uu  iron  halberd,  and  to  pour 
a  glassful  into  a  basin  or  a  turet'ii  would  bo  incongruous,  ami  few 
would  recommend  it.  What  \a  the  priiuriplo  of  debating?  To  illus- 
trate deep  1  hou<rhts  l>y  simple  ones.  And  how  (lo  we  prove  that 
we  possess  knowledge ：'  By  illustrating  dil'fifult  points  by  «、asy  ones. 
Sages  and  worthies  n^»5  to  weigh,  what  suits  tlie.  iliH'emit  talmts. 
Hence  tlie  difference  of  style,  which  may  be  diliicult  or  easy. 


Since  Wang  Ch  umj  deplored  the  popular  feeling,  he  wrote  his 
Censures  ou  Public  Morals.  ； nul  also  lamt'iiting  the  vain  efforts  of 
the  emperor's  govcriuncnt.  which  was  endeavouring  to  govern  tlio 
people,  but  I'ould  not  iind  tho  rii^ht  w  nv,  nor  understand  what  \va.s 
required,  and  mourn l'ul  and  disheartened  did  not  see  its  course,  1"' 
wrote  the  book  on  gov<Timient.2  Furthcrninre  disgusted  witli  the 
many  deceitful  books  ami  jiopular  literature  devoid  of  voracity  and 
truth  fulness,  \\v  coujposetl  the  Disciuisilions  ( Lun-luhifj). 

The  worthies  sari's  are  dead,  and  t lid r  great  doctrine  lias 
split  up.  Many  new  roads  have  been  struck  mil,  on  which  manv 
people  have  stumbled.  Kvery  one  must  have  his  own  school.  In- 
telligent men  have  soimi  this,  but  were  unable  to  find  the  right 
way.  Olil  traditions  have  bfcn  transmitted,  oit!n'r  written  down, 
or  spread  by  liearsay.  Since  (licv  、v《'rt、  dating  fnmi  over  a  lmiHlred 
years  backwards  and  growing  older  from  day  to  (lay,  people  have 
regarded  tluun  us  antii|ue  lore  ami  there I'oro  nrar  the  truth,  and 
this  belief  became  so  rooted  in  their  minds,  that  they  themselves 
w  ere  incapable  uf  eradicating  it  a^airi. 

I'or  (hia  reason  thr  Disquisitions  have  bcru  written  to  nhow 
the  truth.  Tliry  are  in  a  lively  stylo  and  full  of  ('(""i'm'，'rsy.  Every 
tspecious  and  futile  argument  has  been  tested,  ！ semhlanct'  and  false- 
lux  >d  have  been  rejected,  and  only  wluit  is  real  and  solid  has  bt't'n 
preserved .  Lo«»se  manners  lmv«，  been  suppressed,  ami  the  customs 
of  Fu  IJsi's  time3  revived. 


Wang  Ch  ung'.s  writings  arc  lucid  and  eiisv  to  understand.  There 
are  those  who  pretend  that  the  words  of  a  gooil  debater  must  be 
profound,  and  the  compositions  of  an  able  writer  obscure.  The 

1  An  old  State  in  Anhui. 
3  The  Golden  Age. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


71 


srylo  of  the  rlassic  literaturi'  anil  the  s;»yin<;s  of  \vi>rtliit's  and  sa<;»'s 
:"v  ijnind  and  inajestic.  Ix'autil'ul  and  rclincd,  ;nul  (lifiicult  to  grasj> 
Hf  tirsr.  Those  、vlm  study  their  \v\io\o  life,  lcani  to  understand  tlu'in 
witli  the  necessary  explanations.  Tln、  genius  of  the  first  tliinl"'rs 
b«'ini^  so  wonderful,  their  expressions  cannot  bo  the  same  as  those  of 
ordinary  people.  Gems,  tliev  say,  are  couceaK-d  in  stones,  und  pearls 
in  lisli-maMs.  Only  jcwel-lapidaries  and  j)parl-fX|)(*rts  can  iind  tliein. 
l  licse  [irerious  things  cannot  be  scrn,  because  thrv  art-  hidden,  and 
thus  truisms  must  bt*  prolound  and  deep,  and  hard  to  gra.sj>. 

Tlie  "Censures  on  Morals"  arc  intended  to  roust*  people,  tlieic- 
iort'  the  meaning:  is  perspicuous  and  the  stylr  (juite  plain.  Hut 
wliv  tnust  the  Lttng-l^ng  be  like  thi.s  too'.*  Is  the  talt  nt  of  the 
author  so  shallow,  that  it  was  alisolutelv  imjiusjsilile  to  liide  any- 
thing? Why  is  tlie  style  so  jierspicuous,  and  (juitc  a  (litlerent 
principle  followed  than  in  the  classical  lit，'r;"ur，'？ 

31  v  ri'ply  is  as  follows.  A  gem  is  (:("i,'""t'<l  in  a  stone  and 
a  pearl  in  a  fisli-inaw,  und  thcrelore  they  a vv  covered  nnd  in  the 
dark.  Hut,  wlien  tlio  colour  of  the  gom  l>,、:ims  from  the  heart  of 
the  stcme.  and  the  lustre  oi'  the  pearl  breaks  I li rough  tlie  fisli-maw, 
are  they  still  hidden?  Tlioy  are  like  my  t hitughts,  before  they 
havi-  been  lixrd  in  books.  Knslirined  in  my  bosom.  tht'V  are  like 
gems  or  pearls  in  their  coiuTalment,  sliinini;  forth,  brilliant  as  thf 
Mplcndour  of  the  l"'avt'nly  liodics,  and  t:l"ar  as  the  distiiu  t  lim's  of 
tlie  surfat'e  of  the  earth. 

Lt'st  tilings  slioulil  remain  doubtful  and  obscure  to  lis,  wc 
oau  describe  them  all  by  natnos,  and.  provided  that  tlie  iLimes  are. 
clear,  all  the  tilings  bfcoino  delliu'd.  The  Lun-heuy  discusses  these 
<[uestions  impartially. 

Id  speaking,  it  is  essential  to  use  clear  words,  and  in  writing, 
to  employ  plain  signs.  Tlio  style  <»f  einincnt  scholars  is  refined, 
but  their  words  can  always  l»f  understood,  and  tlicir  nieaning  al- 
ways be  caught.  Their  readers  are  suddenly  I'uliglitened  like  blind 
men  who  recover  their  siglit,  or  stirred  up  like  deaf  men  who 
suddenly  learn  to  hear.  Wlion  a  child  who  lias  been  blind  for 
three  yeare,  unexpectedly  sees  liis  pnrt'iits,  1"'  would  not,  at  once, 
know  them  on  perceiving  tlu*ni,  why  thru  should  lie  give  utterance 
to  his  joy? 

Let  a  huge  tree  stand  by  the  road-side,  and  a  long  ditch  run 
along  a  bank,  then  the  Nx'alitv  is  wt-Il  deHned,  and  everybody 
knows  it.  Now,  should  the  tree  not  bo  huge  ； my  more  and  dis- 
appear, and  the  ditch  not  be  long  and  be  hidden,  and  the  place 
be  shown  to  people,  even  Yao  nud  <S/'"〃  w(»uld  he  perplexed. 


igitized  by  Google 


72  Lun-H^ng:  A.  Biographical. 

The  human  features  are  divided  into  more  than  seventy  dif- 
ferent classes.  The  flesh  of  the  cheeks  being  pure  and  white,  the 
five  colours  can  be  clearly  discerned,  and  the  slightest  sorrow, 
pleasure,  and  other  emotions,  all  find  expression  in  tlie  features. 
A  physiognomist  will  not  once  be  mistaken  in  ten  cases.  But  if 
tlic  face  be  blackened  and  begrimed,  or  covered  with  a  layer  of 
dirt  so,  that  the  features  are  bidden,  then  pliyaiognomists  will  give 
wrong  answers  nine  times  out  of  ten. 

The  style  is  formed  of  words.  It  may  be  shallow,  perspicuous, 
and  distinct,  or  deep,  abstruse,  elegant,  and  polished.  Who  shall 
distinguish  it? 

We  speak  to  express  our  thoughts,  and  from  fear,  that  our 
words  might  be  lost,  we  commit  them  to  writing.  Writing  liavirig 
tlie  same  purpose  as  speaking,  wherefore  sliould  it  conceal  the 
meaning? 

A  judge  must  hate  wrong.  Now,  would  a  magistrate,  who 
while  deriding  a  doubtful  case  gives  a  confuse  and  unintelligent 
verdict,  be  a  better  official  tlian  another,  who  clearly  distinguishes 
every  point,  and  can  easily  be  understood? 

In  oral  discussions,  one  makes  clear  distinctions  out  of  regards 
for  the  audience,  and  in  written  disputatious  one  elucidates  one's 
meaning  to  be  understood.  In  historical  works,  a  clear  and  intel- 
ligible style  is  most  appreciated,  and  of  profound  productions,  full 
of  beautiful  thoughts,  but  hard  to  read,  there  are  only  pieces  of 
irregular  verse  and  dithyrambs.  As  tor  the  classical  and  semi- 
classical  works  and  the  \v(»rcls  of  tlie  worthies  and  sages,  the  an- 
cient and  modern  languages  are  diflVrcnt,  and  speech  varies  in  the 
diflerent  parts  of  the  empire.  At  tlu*  time,  when  these  men  spoke, 
they  did  not  wish  that  their  words  should  be  difficult  to  uiidt*r- 
stand,  or  that  tlieir  meaning  should  be  hiddcu.  If  later  ages  did 
xu)t  understand  them,  this  is  owing  to  the  rem(»tenei>s  of  time. 
Therefore  one  may  speak  of  tlie  diilereuct*  of  language,  but  not  of 
genius  or  shallowness  of  style.  If  tlu'  reading  offers  great  diffi- 
culties, the  works  may  be  considered  as  not  very  cleverly  written, 
but  this  should  not  be  reputed  a  great  wisdom. 

Ch  in  ShUi  Ihuing  Ti  reading  Unit  Fei  Tse's  work  ex«:laimed 
with  a  sigh ！  "Alas!  that  I  am  alone,  and  have  not  got  this  man!  "  1 
They  were  contemporaries,  he  could  uudcrstand  his  wortls  and 


1  According  to  the  'Ski-chi  chap.  (J3  p.  llv  (Biography  of  Han  Fti  7V)  tlie 
emperor  said ： ―  "  Alas!  If  1  could  see  this  man,  I  would  be  willing  to  live  and 
die  with  him  ！ " 


Digitized  by  Google 


Autobiography.  73 

reflect  upon  what  lie  said.  If  tlie  book  had  been  so  profound  and 
exquisite,  that  he  wanted  a  teacher  to  comprehend  it,  he  would 
have  flung  it  to  the  ground,  and  it  was  no  use  sighing. 1 

An  author  wislies  his  work  to  be  intelligible,  but  difficult  to 
write,  and  lie  does  not  care,  if  it  be  hard  to  grasp,  but  easy  to 
write.  In  lectures  one  aims  at  perspicuity,  tliat  the  hearers  can 
follow,  and  does  not  affect  obscurity  and  ambiguity  to  baffle  tlie 
readers.  Mencim  knew  an  intelligent  man  by  the  sparkling  of  liis 
eyes.3    One  learns  to  know  what  a  text  is  worth  by  its  lucidity. 


Tlie  book  of  Wang  Ch  ung  is  of  another  type  than  the  usual 
writings.    The  following  objection  might  be  raised  against  it: ― 

In  literature  it  is  of  importance  to  conform  to  the  public 
feeling,  and  not  to  be  in  opposition  to  received  ideas.  Then  not 
one  out  of  a  hundred  readers  will  tiud  auytliing  to  blame,  and 
not  one  out  of  a  thousand  hearers  \\\\\  take  exception.  Therefore 
Kwm  7>'.'3  said  that,  where  somebody  is  speaking  in  a  house,  the 
audivnee  must  iill  the  whole  liouse.  and,  when  he  speaks  in  a  ball, 
the  entire  hall  should  be  full.  Now  Wnug  Ch  ung's  arguments  are 
not  in  accordance  with  public  opinion.  Consequently  his  words 
controvert  all  common  ideas,  and  (lu  not  tally  witli  the  general 
views. 

I  reply  that  in  arguing,  the  essential  thing  is  truth,  not 
elegance,  that  tlie  facts  should  at  all  events  be  correct,  and  that 
consensit^  is  not  the  highest,  aim.  Investigating  a  question,  one  dis- 
cusses the  pros  and  com,  how  would  it  be  possible  not  to  deviate 
from  old  ideas  and  perhaps  offend  the  ears  of  the  common  liearer? 
When  the  general  feeling  in  wrong,  it  cannot  bo  followed.  One 
denounces  and  discards  tliat  whicli  is  lalse,  and  keeps  and  establishes 
that  which  is  true.  It*  we  were  to  go  by  majority,  and  conform  to 
the  public  feeling,  we  could  only  lollow  the  good  old  rules  and  pre- 
cedents, and  recite  them  over  and  over  again,  but  how  could  there 
be  any  discussion? 

1  Han  F,i  Tat  was  sent  m  envoy  from  his  native  State  {Han)  to  ('Win  Shih 
Huang  Ti，  who  first  appreciated  him  very  much  and  wished  to  appoint  liim  to  some 
liigh  post.  By  the  intrigues  of  U  Sur,  however,  lie  was  induced  to  imprison  him, 
and  to  condemn  him  to  dcatli.  The  cinpcror  afterwards  repented,  and  cancelled  the 
death  warrant,  but  is  was  too  late,  for  meanwhile  Han  Fei  Tee  had  taken  poison. 
(Cf.  p.  170.) 

*  Cf.  Chap.  XXXU. 

， The  philosopher  Kuan  Chuny. 


Digitized  by  Google 


74 


Lun-Hong:  A*  Biographical. 


Wlien  Covfvrius  was  attending  the  court  and  sitting  next-  to 
Duke  Ai  t>( 丄,' ， tlie  duke  lavoured  him  with  a  peach  and  millet. 
Confndm  iirst  nte  the  inillet  aud  tlieu  the  peacli.  This,  we  must 
admit,  was  the  right  order  of  eating  the  two  courses.  Tl"，  cour- 
tiers, however,  all  covered  their  mouth  and  lauglunl.  Tlioy  lia<U 
ior  a  long  time,  been  used  to  another  custom.  Now  1,  in  lact, 
resemble  r""Jucim  eating  the  two  dishes  in  the  order  described 
above.  ( )rdinary  people  take  exception  like  the  courtiers  laughing 
in  their  sleeves. 

Beautiful  festive  songs  were  considered  as  too  melancholic,  in 
Cl^ny 1  arul  pantoininies.  at  great  celebrations,  tound  no  iavour  in  Clum. 

The  livr  Leading  Princes'2  deolincd  to  cast  a  look  upon  the 
Canons 《才  Yno  and  Sltua,  aud  Chi  unci  Meny 3  would  uot  read  the 
works  of  ( /"'y  aud  M<1.  Ti.  IMans  lV>r  securing  the  peace  in  times 
(»T  danger  are  scollrd  at  iu  side-alloys,  and  schemes  of  reform  ridi- 
culed by  coiiiinon  people.  \(  tliere  were  au  exquisite  disli,  vulgar 
people  would  not  taste  it，  though  Yi  Ti  and  IV  Ya 4  might  eat  it 
witli  the  greatest  relish,  and  if  there  were  a  precious  jade-stoiu% 
ordinary  people  would  throw  it  away,  wlim'as  //"5  would 

hoard  it  up  as  a  treasure.  Who  would  be  right,  who  wrong,  aud 
who  could  be  trusted?  Propriety  and  conunon  usage  are  always 
in  opposition,  when  has  it  not  been  so?  When  Duke  W^n  of  Lu 
infringed  tlie  rule  of  ^acrilioes,'1  live  men  resisted  him. 

Great  scholars  will  never  give  up  reseantlios  of  the  above 
lueutioued  kind,  ami  common  people  will  always  dislike  them.  And 
so  will  the  savants  enjoy  und  approriatc  books,  which  bewilder  the 
masses,  and  wliicli  the  narrow-miaded  will  flee. 

Wang  Ch  ungs  book  cannot  be  free  from  imperfectiou.  Some 
say  that  in  spoaking  lie  <lors  not  clmosc  the  、、or《ls,  nor  in  writing, 
the  phrases.   Cotiipositions  must  be  tastefully  writtrn,  and  disciLssions 

1  In  i  linuj  licentious  mu^ic,  but  not  the  serious  songs  of  the  Book  of  Odes 
were  ajtprcciatcd. 

'l  Tlie  ii\  e  leaders  of  the  empire,  the  moht  powerful  princes  during  ti"， 
Tch  cent.  n.r.  to  "it:  一  Duke  Huan  of  (  h'i,  Duke  Wrn  of  (  Am,  Duke  IlHiany  of  Suiif/, 
Duke  (  haany  of  ( 7'  "，  aud  Duke  M u  of  ( 'hUtt.  Tlmy  were  more  bunt  on  cuiH]Uc$t  ihan 
intcrc^tod  in  the  moral  laws  expounded  in  the  C-anons  of 】'w  and  Shun  in  die  Sim-king. 

B  The  I'liicfM  of  two  noble  families  in  L"，  contemporaries  o(  ('onfucim. 

4  Vid.  p.  i\\K 

&  cr.  P.  b\i 

r>  Oukc  placed  the  tablet  of  his  deceased  father  above  that  of  his  uncle 
in  the  iuice^tral  Uuiiple.  The  latter,  Duke  J/*"，  was  a  younger  brother  of  Duke 
il"、  but  he  preccilud  in  reign.    Fur  more  details  vid.  T^o-chuany  Duke  Wrn  2nd  year. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


75 


ingeniously  rondm-tcd.  When  such  words  strike  the  ear,  they  cause 
a  pleasant  feeling  in  tlie  heart,  and  when  the  eye  falls  ou  writing, 
the  haiul  does  not  lay  tlie  book  aside  again.  Such  disputations  are 
always  listened  to,  and  excellent  compositions  always  appreciated. 
Now,  sin«Hi  this  new  hook  rliiel'ly  consists  of  comparisons  and 
strictures  on  the  depravity  of  the  age,  and  does  not  praise  what 
is  g(M)d,  it  does  uot  please  the  reader.  The  tunes  played  by  the 
music-master  A  tumg 1  were  always  lull  of  feeling,  and  the  delicacies 
prepared  by  Yi  Ti  aud  V/'  Ya  were  never  tasteless.  When  a  clever 
man  writes  a  book,  it  is  without  a  flaw.  Lil  S/a/i a  and  Huai  Nan 
made  uu  advertisement  on  the  market  gates,  and  tlie  readers  did 
not  fmd  fault  with  one  word  in  their  books.3  Now  the  Lnn-heug 
does  not  possess  tlie  beauties  of  these  two  books.  It  is  loug  enough, 
but  open  to  objections  in  many  r'、s【iects. 

In  reply  I  beg  to  state  that  1"'  who  cherishes  veracity  iloes 
not  trouble  much  about  beauty,  and  that  regulatiug  the  conduct, 
he  does  not  polish  his  words.  Luxuriant  grass  lius  often  abund- 
ance of  blossoms,  and  miglity  loiosts  have  many  dry  branches. 
The  purport  of  words  is  to  clearly  show  the  nature  of  tilings, 
liow  can  they  be  [lolished  and  above  all  censure?  Saving  a  man 
from  fire  or  out  of  water,  we  do  not  care,  whether  we  do  it  in  a 
beautiful  style  or  not,  and,  when  we  debate  on  a  question,  our 
words  must  not  necessarily  be  ingenious.  Plunging  into  a  lake  \ 
to  seize  turtles,  、vi、  have  no  time  to  think,  w  hot  her  we  place  our 
leet  right,  and  catching  dragons  in  deep  water,  we  have  no  time 
to  care  ibr  the  position  of  our  hands. 

In  spite  of  bad  style  and  faulty  terms  the  meaning  may  be 
excellent  and  far  reaching  sometiiiu-s,  and  sweet  words  and  beautiful 
expressions  give  often  a  very  [)Oor  si'nse.  When  a  thousand  clmny 
of  grain  are  cleaiwl,  un»re  than  hull'  are  husks,  and  examiuin^  n 
liutxlred  thousand  cash,  onv.  {iada  t hat  the  broken  coins  exceed  ten 
thousand.  Fine  soups  are  ol'tcn  insipid,  and  the  bt'st  jewels  have 
their  flaws.  A  slip-shod  production  may  possess  great  beautit-s, 
and  a  great  artist  do  very  secoml-  rate  work.  Every  disi:ussion 
lias  its  weak  points,  and  iu  the  ablest  production  some  deficieucies 
can  be  detected. 


' The  music-master  of  the  Duke  of  ('hi"  (cf.  (； hap.  XVII). 
9  Lu  Pu  Wei,  lln-  author  of  the  lAl  Shih  ch' un-':h' h" 

， It  is  related  of  Lu  I'u  Wei  that  lie  placed  a  copy  of  his  work  in  the  market 
place  and  ofVercd  a  reward  of  a  thousand  ''l、m  to  any  one  who  could  aller  one 
character  in  it.    Tlie  same  is  not  known  «.!'  //  'ui  Aan  Tse. 


Digitized  by  Google 


76 


Lun  -Heng:  A.  Biographical. 


Golden  words  come  from  noble  houses,  and  loul  productions 
from  poor  tarailiw,  they  tliiuk.— Nan  Tse  and  Lil  S/1U1 1  did 
uot  encounter  any  difficulties,  because  tlu'y  were  descendants  of  ricli 
houses  and  of  higii  rank.  Since  they  were  noble,  they  could  well 
advertise  on  the  market  place,  and  being  so  wealthy,  they  could 
easily  make  the  alternate  promise  of  a  thousand  chin.  Their  readers 
were  intimidated  and  in  awe,  and  would  never  have  ventured  to 
criticise  oue  character,  even  if  it  liad  been  quite  out  of  place. 


When  Wang  Ch  uiufa  book  was  completed,  it  was  compared 
by  some  with  tlie  works  of  the  ancients,  and  fouiul  to  be  quite 
diflleront  from  the  writings  of  previous  authors.  Some  hold  that  the 
book  may  be  said  to  be  written  partly  in  a  slovenly  style.  Some- 
times it  is  terse,  at  others  dittuse,  sometimes  concise,  sometimes 
prolix.  W  lien  a  problem  is  being  discussed  or  a  question  inves- 
tigated, tin,  author  is  too  summary  or  too  loquacious,  half  sweet, 
half  sour.  The  ("assies  he  does  not  resemble,  with  the  serai-classics 
he  does  not  agree,  nor  does  he  liannoni/e  with  either  Yang  Cii hiy 
Tse  Cluing  <»r  Yang  Yii";  Since  he  is  unlike  the  ancient  authors, 
how  can  he  be  considered  a  good  writer,  or  his  book  be  r^pute<l 
an  able  production  ？ 

I  answer  that,  if  anybody  puta  on  an  alien  appearance  forcibly 
to  be  like  somolxuly  else,  liis  own  shape  is  lost,  and  if  lie  changes 
liis  style  to  resemble  others,  he  loses  liis  peculiar  character.  The 
sons  of  a  hundred  persons  have  not  tlie  same  parents.  Being  all 
born  in  diflfi'.rent  families,  they  cannot  be  similar.  Kacli  one  distin- 
guishes himself  by  his  peculiar  gifts.  If  writings  could  only  then 
be  considered  go<ul,  wlien  they  are  conform  to  a  certain  standard, 
this  would  be  like  substituting  one  workman  for  another  and  de- 
daring  his  work  to  he  a  master-piece,  provided  that  in  hewing  lie 
did  not  cut  his  own  hand. 

All  literary  men  liave  their  own  specialties.  The  one  polishes 
liis  phrases  to  produce  an  elegant  composition,  the  other  combats 
all  errors  to  establish  the  truth.  Their  ultimate  aims  are  tlie 
same,  and  (lie  words  follow  of  tliemselvos.  Thus  tlie  deeds  of 
the  Five  Kmj)erors  were  not  tlirt'erenl,  and  there  was  no  tronHict 
between  tlio  actions  of  the  Three  Rulers.    Beautiful  looks  are  not 


1  Both  were  princes. 
a  Vid.  p.  88. 


igitized  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


77 


the  samo,  but  their  aspect  is  always  pleasing  to  tlie  eye:  senti- 
mental airs  are  not  identical,  luit  their  music  is  always  gratifying 
to  the  ear.  Winos  have  different  llavours,  but  thoy  all  inebriate, 
the  tastes  of  various  cereals  vary,  hut  they  all  appease  our  hunger. 
If  conformity  to  old  standard  b«  required  of  a  literary  production, 
then  we  nould  be  entitled  to  expect  that  S/tm>  also  should  have 
eye-brows  with  eight  colours 1  and  Yn  oyen  with  double  pupils.2 

Wang  Ch  ung'^  book  is  vt'r.v  voluminous.  Some  say  that  in 
writing  tlie  chief  tiling  is  to  hv  brief  and  clear,  and  that  in  speaking 
one  must  be  short  and  plain.  The  words  of  a  good  debater  are 
succinct,  but  to  the  point,  tlie  stvle  of  a  good  writer  is  concise, 
but  perspicuous.  Now  Wang  Ch  ung\s  new  work  contains  more  than 
ten  thousand  sentences.  For  a  reader  it  is  impossible  to  work 
through  sucli  an  enormous  mass,  and  tlu'rc  are  so  many  chapters, 
that  t liey  cannot  all  In'  transmitted.  The  autlior  of  so  much  bad 
stuff  may  well  be  called  a  fool.  Short  scntonres  are  easy  to  enun- 
ciate, whereas  a  bulky  work  presents  great  difficulties.  Cienis  are 
few,  stones  many ；  that  which  occurs  in  great  number,  is  not  pre- 
cious. Dragons  are  rare,  fish  numerous:  that  which  is  of  rare 
occurence,  is  justly  deemed  divine. 

1  admit  that  tliere  is  sucli  a  saying.  Concise  language  is  not 
loug,  but  beautiful  language  must  not  be  concise.  If  they  are 
useful  to  the  world,  a  hundred  cliaptere  do  no  harm,  while  one  para- 
graph, if  useless,  m.uy  be  superlluous.  If  there  arc  several  things, 
all  useful,  the  longer  rank  before  the  shorter.  W  ho  is  richer,  he  who 
has  piled  up  a  thousand  chin,  or  lie  wlio  jxissesses  a  hundred? 

Longer  works  are  prel'crable  to  shorter  rmes,  and  a  small 
amount  of  wealth  is  better  than  poverty.  Most  people  have  not 
a  single  book,  I  possess  a  hundred  cliaptere:  others  have  not  one 
character,  T  have  more  than  ten  thousand  sentences.  Who  is  the 
cleverer? 

Now  they  do  not  say  that  my  words  are  wrong,  but  that 
tliey  arc  too  many:  they  do  not  say  that  the  world  tloes  not  like 
good  tilings,  but  that  it  cannot  take  them  nil  in.  The  reason  why 
my  Imok  cannot  be  so  concise  is  tliat  lor  luiildirig  many  houses  a 
small  «;rouml  would  not  be  suflicient,  and  that  for  the  registration 
of  a  large  populace  few  registers  would  be  inadnjuatr.  At  present, 
tlie  errors  are  so  many,  that  the  words  nci'ossary  to  point  out  tlie 
truth,  show  wliat  is  right,  and  controvert  what  is  falsi',  cannot 
well  be  brief  and  succinct. 

, Like  Yao  (cf.  Chap.  XXIV). 

2  Ab  Shun  had  (loc.  cit). 


Digitized  by  Google 


78 


Lun-II('ng:  A.  Biograpbical. 


Han  Fei  Tses  work  is  like  the  branch  of  a  tree.  The  chapters 
art'  joined  together  by  tens,  and  the  sentences  count  by  ten 
thousands.  F(»r  a  larire  body  the  dress  ojmnot  be  narrow,  and  if 
there  be  many  subjects,  tlie  text  ituist  not  be*  too  summary.  A  great 
variety  of  subjiM-ts  mjuiros  abundance  of  words.  In  a  large,  extent 
of  water,  there  are  many  fish,  in  an  emperor's  capital,  there  is  plenty 
of  grain,  and  on  the  market  of  a  metropolis,  there  is  a  throng  of 
people. 

My  book  may  be  voluminous,  but  the  subjects  treated  are 
inanifolfl.  T  oi  Kung  II  ana  1  in  anciiMit  times  and  recentlv  'I'tiug  Chung 
Sim 2  jjrodiH'ed  books  containing  more  titan  a  hundred  chapters. 
My  book  also  contains  n"m、  tlian  n  liundred  cliapters.  Those 
who  contoiul  that  they  are  too  many,  only  mean  to  say  that 
the  author  is  of  low  origin,  and  that  the  readers  cannot  but  take 
exception  to  it. 

Wlion  we  compare  a  river,  whose  waters  overflow  the  banks, 
with  othors,  whioli  is  the  bitr^osi  ；*  And,  when  the  em'oons  oi" 
a  wrtain  sporit-s  of  、v,)rms  arc  esjieciallv  heavy  and  big,  which 
worms  yield  most  silk  ？ 


Wang  (  Ii  uny  was  not  lucky  in  Ins  official  career,  and  only 
wrote  books  and  this  autobiography.  Some  one  might  find  fault 
willi  him,  arguing  thus: 

"TIr'  important  thing  is  always  that  a  man  of  great  talent 
sliould  make  a  good  career.  Wlien  he  finds  employment,  ami  his 
words  are  listened  to.  lie  can  (listinguish  himself  by  his  work,  and 
thus  rise  to  high  honour.  Now.  you  are  living  in  misery,  and 
your  career  has  l»een  spoiled.  Vou  had  no  opportunity  of  try  ins: 
your  talents  in  practice,  or  usinii-  your  stmigdi  in  the  fulfilment  at' 
official  duties.  Therefore  you  only  conimittod  your  sjieculations  to 
writing  and  made  your  notes.  What  use  are  yonr  beautiful  words 
to  yourself,  and  wliat  aim  are  vou  pursuing  with  your  extensive 
writings? " 

Nobody  was  ever  more  talented  than  Confttcius,  and  yet  bis 
talents  were  not  appreciated.  Hi*  wan  expelled,  and  a  tree  felled 
over  him.    He  bad  ">  hasten  tlie  washina;  ol"  I  lis  ri,','3  and  was 

1   T'ai  Kung  Want/  is  the  full  appellative  of  Wi:n  Wane's  minister,  usually 
railed  T  ai  /、，'".,/,  on  whom  cf.  Chap.  XXXIX. 
5  Cf.  p.  ：?9  and  Cl.ap.  XXXVII. 

»  When  forced  to  leave  Ch  i.  (V-<\.  MenciuJ,  Bk.  V,  Pf.  II,  cliap.  I,  4,  Lc^ge 
Vol.  11,  p.  247.)  • 


igitized  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


79 


surrounded.  ITis  traces  were  obliterated,  he  was  tormented  by 
hunger  between  Ch  en  and  '/'  •、,"••  and  his  disciples  looked  starved.1 
、'（>、、、 inv  talents  do  not  roine  tu»ar  those  of  ('《,"fm;us、  but  my 
hardships  do  not  equal  his.    Am  I  to  W  despised  tliorefon1? 

Besides  thv  successful  are  not  always  clever,  or  the  distrrssod, 
simpletons.  The  lucky  win,  and  flic  unlucky  lose.  Witli  a  liberal 
fate  and  »ood  fortune,  even  a  vulvar  person  l)e('oim、s  noble  and 
SentoeK  witli  a  nifr^anUv  iate  and  bad  Ibrtuue,  the  most  remarkable 
man  remains  wretched  and  miserable.  If  talents  and  virtue  were  to 
1"'  ineasunHl  by  success,  tluMi  tho  <;reat  lords  invested  with  tlie 
domain  of  a  town,  and  living  on  the  soil,  would  all  be  wise  men. 

( onfucin^  and  Ti  were  noble  of  themselves,  hut  their  rank 
was  low.  If,  tbereforo,  peoplr  are  living  in  pure  spheres,  hut  do 
blark  deeds,  or  if  tliev  have  a  yearly  income  of  a  thousand  chuug 
to  live  upon,  but  not  a  single  accomplishment,  we  can  only  smile. 
Provided  that  our  virtue  he  \\\^\\  and  our  name  untaniisJuul,  then 
our  office  may  be  low  and  our  income  meagre,  it  is  not  the  fault 
of  our  talents,  aud  we  should  not  feel  opposed  by  it. 

Scholars  would  like  to  share  the  hut  with  Hsien,2  but  uot  to 
be  put  on  a  level  witli  7'  m,3  they  would  gladly  wander  about 
witl:  l*o  17/  hut  decline  to  associate  with  robber  Chf,  Great  scholars 
have  other  ambitions  than  their  people.  Therefore  their  fa  inc.  is 
not  tliat  of  the  world.  Their  bodies  decay  like  grass  and  trees, 
but  their  glory  shinos  as  long  as  the  sun  and  the  moon  send  tlicir 
ravs.  Tlieir  condition  may  be  as  poor  as  that  of  Confndu^^  provided 
only  that  their  writings  rank  with  tliose  of  Yang  Jhiung.  Tliat  is 
mv  ideal.  Outward  success,  but  a  limited  kuo、vl('《l^,  a  liiijli  post, 
but  little  virtue;  that  is  the  ambition  of  others;  1  would  consider 
it  a  bondage. 

If  somebody  has  the  luck  to  be  henrd  with  his  advice,  and 
lives  in  lionour  and  well  being,  all  tliis  is  gone  after  a  lauulml 
years  like  other  things.  His  name  does  not  ivmie  down  to  the 
next  generation,  and  not  a  word  from  lus  hand  is  ld't  in  any 
(lociuneiit.    He  has  had  stores  full  of  emoluments  perhaps,  in  the 

1  Cf.  Chap.  XL. 

•  //,'>«  二 】,""/,  »W，  a  disciple  of 《 o"f"c""、  noted  for  his  contempt  of  wordly 
advantages.  Made  governor  of  a  town,  lie  dorlincd  his  offiruil  a  t  low  a  nrv  ( A  nafrrh  VI,!!) 
f  haong  Tac  makes  him  live  in  a  mud  hut.  He  nMitrasta  him  with  T  >r,  another 
follower  of  (  onfuciun,  wlio  came  driving  up  to  liis  (！ aor  in  a  fine  chariot  and  in  a 
white  robe  lined  with  purple. 

3  T'se  t—-  Tttan  Mu  TV,  or  T、f  htt npf  a  disci[>lc  of  ^  onfucins^  wlio  heranie  a 
offiria!,  and  \*ery  wealthy  (virl.  Cliap  XXXI  and  XXXIII).  He  was  a  swell, 
just  the  reverse  of  Ihkn. 


80 


Lun  -  Hong:  A.  Biographical. 


realms  of  litemture  and  virtue  lie  leaves  no  riches.  That  is  not 
wliat  T  prize.  Vast  virtue  of  tlie  highest  excellence,  abundance  of 
extensive  knowledge,  a  pencil  dripping  with  characters  like  raiu,  and 
an  oveHlowiug  spring  of  words,  rich  talents,  a  wonderful  erudition, 
generous  deeds,  and  a  noble  niiml,  witli  such  qualities  a  man's  body 
may  belong  to  one  generation,  his  name  will  be  transmitted  for  a 
thousand  vw*s.    That  seems  extraordinary  and  desirable  to  me. 

Wang  Ch  uny  is  from  a  simpli'  family,  in  which  he  stands 
quite  alone.    A  caviller  might  say  ： ― 

" Your  ancestors  have  not  left  you  a  treasure  of  pure  virtue, 
nor  a  collection  of  literary  works.  You  may  yourself  write  the 
most  brilliant  essays,  you  have  no  basis  to  stand  upon,  and  there- 
fore no  claim  to  our  admiration." 

" When  a  fon;e  bursts  upon  us  quite  suddenly,  not  by  degrees, 
we  call  it  a  phenomenon.  When  a  creature  is  born  from  quite 
dissimilar  parents,  we  call  it  a  wonder.  When  something  quite 
unusual  appears  all  at  once,  it  is  regarded  as  a  supernatural  appear- 
ance, and  when  something  difTerent  from  anything  else  quite  ab- 
ruptly comes  forth,  it  is  termed  a  miracle." 

"Who  are  your  ancestors?  Their  names  have  not  been  recorded 
ill  former  times.  You  did  not  spring  from  a  learned  family,  whose 
meinbers  have  already  walked  the  path  of  literature,  and  you  write 
disquisitions  of  several  thousand  or  ten  thousand  sentences.  This 
must  be  considered  a  supernatural  phenomenon.  How  could  we 
appreciate  such  writings,  or  think  them  able  productions?"1 

I  beg  to  reply  that  a  bird  without  a  pedigree  is  a  pluenix, 
an  animal  without  a  family,  a  unirorn,  a  man  without  an  ancestry, 
a  sage,  and  a  thing  without  a  peer,  a  jewel.  And  so  it  is  with 
men  of  great  talents,  who  are  browbeaten  and  viewed  with  dis- 
favour by  their  age.  Scholars  of  worth  appear  single,  and  precious 
things  grenv  solitary.  How  **ould  literature  be  inherited?  If  a 
man  could  learn  to  become  a  sa^e,  tlien  the  water  of  the  F^ng 
river2  would  have  a  source,  and  auspicious  grain  an  old  stem. 

1  The  Chinese  are  in  awe  of,  but  do  not  like  wonders,  miracles,  monsters, 
in  short  all  that  is  against  the  regular  course  of  nature.  So  they  are  prejudiced 
against  Wan</  (.'h  ung,  because  he  is  a  homo  novws.  Not  being  u  descendant  from 
a  literary  or  a  nohle  family,  lie  should  not  attempt  to  rise  above  the  average  of 
his  fellow-citizens. 

2  Tlie  source  of  the  Ftng,  an  affluent  of  the  Wei  in  M"'."'  is  well  known. 
I  presume  that  for  "F"p  river" 《豐水 wo  ought  to  read  "  Wine  Spring  "醋 泉. 
The  plionetic  element  for  Fi'ng  and  Li  "  Wine"  is  very  similar,  and  the  Wine  Springs 
are  often  mentioned  as  auspicious  omens  in  connection  with  ph»pnixes,  unicorns,  and 
auspicious  grain. 


xJ  by  Google 


Autobiography. 


81 


When  a  remarkable  scholar  appears  and  puts  forward  his 
noble  doctrines,  he  does  not  fall  under  the  general  rule,  and  his 
capacity  cannot  be  measured  by  the  bushel.  Therefore  events  which 
seldom  liappen  are  recorded  on  tablets  and  books,  and  rare  things 
engraved  oa  bronze  vases.  The  Five  Emperors  did  not  rise  in  one 
generation,  and  Yi  Yin 1  and  T'ai  Kung  Wang 9  did  not  issue  from 
one  family.  There  was  a  distance  of  thousand  Li  between  them, 
and  one  lived  several  hundred  years  after  the  other.  When  scholars 
of  note  quietly  develop  their  marvellous  faculties,  they  do  not  be- 
come famous  as  descendants  of  noble  lines. 

The  calf  of  a  black  cow  may  be  brown,  this  doea  not  affect 
the  nature  of  the  animal.  The  ancestors  of  a  scholar  may  be 
coarse,  provided  that  he  himself  is  pure,  it  has  no  influence  upon 
his  character.  K'un3  was  wicked,  and  Ytt  a  sage,  Sou*  waa  per- 
verse, and  Shun  divine.  Po  Niu&  was  visited  with  a  horrible  dis- 
ease, and  Chung  Kung^  was  clean  and  strong.  Yen  Lu1  was  vulgar 
and  mean,  and  Yen  Hui  outvied  all  his  companions.  Confiuitts  and 
Mi  Ti  had  stupid  ancestors,  and  they  themselves  were  sages.  The 
Yang  family  ha<l  not  been  successful,  when  Yitng  Tse  Yfln  rose  like 
a  star,  and  the  house  of  Htian  had  been  tolerably  well  off,  until 
Ihian  Chiln  Shan 8  took  liis  brilliant  flight.  A  man  must  have  been 
imbued  with  more  than  the  ordinary  dose  of  the  original  fluid  to 
become  au  able  writer. 

 m  


In  the  third  year  of  Yuan-ho,9  Wang  Ch  ung  emigrated  to  Tan- 
yanff，w  Chiu~chiang, 1 1  and  Lu'chicaig 12  in  the  province  of  Yang-chou, 13  and 
was  appointed  sub-prefect.   His  abilities  were  small,  and  his  office 


I  Minister  of  T'ang,  the  founder  of  the  Shang  dynasty. 
i  Cf.  p.  78. 

»  F«V  fether. 

«  Ku  Sou,  Shun'a  father. 

6  A  disciple  of  r<m/*i/CTM-s  who  suffered  from  leprosy  (cf.  Chap.  XXXIII). 

•  Another  disciple  of  Con/ttcn^,  a  relation  of  Po  Nht,  botli  belonging  to 

the  Jon  clan. 

7  Ten  Htd'x  father. 

»  Cf.  p.  39  and  Chap.  XXXVEL 

9  86  A.D. 

10  Under  the  Han  a  circuit  comprising  parte  of  Kiangsu  and  Anhuu 

II  A  circuit  in  Anhui. 

11  Another  circuit  in  ArUtui. 

13  A  very  large  province  under  the  Han  dynasty,  comprising  nearly  the  whole 
lerritory  of  the  modern  provinces  of  Kiang>u,  Anhui,  h'iwiy'i,  I'ukun,  and  Chekutnt/. 


Digitized  by  Google 


82 


Lun-Heng:  A.  BiographicAl. 


was  important.  His  chief  duties  were  in  connection  with  official 
correspondents.  All  plans  of  writing  anything  he  had  given  up 
for  many  years.  In  rho  second  year  of  Chang-lio^  his  business  in 
the  province  ("eased.  He  lived  at  liomc,  and  gradually  advanced 
in  age,  till  he  reached  about  seventy  years.  Then  lie  gave  up  liis 
official  carriage,  ami  his  official  career  was  definitelv  closed.  He 
could  not  liel|>  it.  |  He  had  many  annoyances,  and  his  body  felt 
the  infirmities  of  a^c.  His  liair  grew  white,  his  teeth  fell  out.  Iio 
became  older  from  day  to  day.  and  his  ooinrades  ilispersetl.  He 
had  notliing  to  rely  upon.  \va»  too  poor  to  nurse  himself,  and  had 
no  joy  left.  But  time  went  slowly  on,  tlie  leug  and  hsing  years2 
came  to  an  end,  but  thougli  lie  was  afraid  that  his  (U-atli  wjus 
near  at  hand,  \\o  was  still  full  of  silly  ideas.  Then  lie  wrote  a 
book  on  Mncrobiot'u  > 3  in  sixteen  chapter*. 

To  keej)  liimself  alive,  lie  cherished  the  vital  fluid.  As  a 
stimulant  for  the  appetite  ho  used  wine.  Closing  eyes  and  ears 
a^ain^t  external  inflm'm'es.  lie  spared  liis  rncr^v  as  a  moans  of  sclf- 
protet'tinn.  Using  nn'dicinos  lie  kqit  up  his  forces,  and  by  following 
tliis  method  lie  liopcd  to  prolong  his  days.  For  a  while  he  did 
not  a^e,  but  when  it  was  too  late,  there  was  no  return. 

This  book  was  left  as  a  guide  to  posterity.  Hut  the  duration 
of  human  life  is  limited.  Men  like  animals  live  for  a  while  and 
die.  We  can  only  remember  the  years  gone  by,  who  can  order 
them  to  stand  still?  We  must  go  dftwn  to  the  yellow  sources,  and 
become  earth  and  ashes.  From  ffuang  7V  and  T  nng  down  to  the 
C]\  in  and  Han  many  have  been  guided  by  the  holy  doctrine  and 
have  found  the  truth  by  their  genius,  just  like  a  scales  and  bright 
like  a  mirror,  yet  young  and  old  they  have  lived  and  died,  of  old 
and  now  all  have  been  included.    Life  cannot  he  prolonged,  alas! 

1   88  A.D. 

3  The  cyclical  years  ^'mg-yin :  90  a.d.  and  hMnp-mao :  91  a.o. 
3  Yang  h.'Vtff  *h，i. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Replies  in  Sdf-Defenfle.  83 


CHAPTER  II. 
Replies  in  Self-Defense  (Tui-iso). 

Some  one  might  put  the  following  question:  The  worthies 
and  sages  were  not  born  for  nothing;  decidedly  their  minds  were 
required.  How  is  it  that  from  Confucius  and  Ti  down  to  Hsiin 
Tse 1  and  Menciua  they  all  acted  as  teachers  and  left  their  works 
to  posterity? 

Our  reply  is  that  the  sages  wrote  the  Classics,  and  the 
worthies  composed  their  records.  They  rectified  the  depraved 
customs,  and  enjoined  upon  the  people  to  revert  to  truth  aud  sin- 
cerity. The  thirteen  thousand  chapters  of  the  Six  Dej)artinents  of 
Literature8  increased  the  good  and  diminished  the  evil,  sometimes 
restricting,  sometimes  expanding,  and  urging  on  t)ie  stragglers,  with 
a  view  to  leading  them  back  from  their  by-paths  into  tlie  right  way. 

Confucius  wrote  the  Ch  un-ch  in  in  consequence  of  the  depra- 
vity of  the  people  of  Chrm.  He,  therefore,  established  the  smallest 
merit,  and  blamed  the  slightest  wrong;  he  removed  every  disorder, 
and  re-established  propriety.  The  ways  of  men  as  well  as  those 
of  the  sovereign  were  well  ordered  by  him.  To  check  extravagant 
and  mean  practices  one  must  take  every  precaution,  and  use  every 
means.  When  a  dyke  breaks,  and  no  measures  are  taken,  there  will 
be  a  disastrous  inundation.  When  a  net  opens,  and  is  not  shut 
again,  the  auimals  caught  in  it  are  lost.  Had  the  ways  of  Chou 
not  degenerated,  the  people  would  not  have  been  uncultured,  and 
had  the  people  not  been  uncultured,  the  C/t  un-ch  iu  would  not  have 
been  written. 

If  the  doctrines  of  Yang  Chu  and  Ti3  had  not  perverted 
the  traditions,  the  records  of  Mencius  would  not  liave  been  pub- 
lished. Had  the  I  Ian  State  not  been  small  and  weak,  and  its 
system  of  government  corrupt,  I  Ian  Fei  s  book  would  not  have 
appeared.4    Had  Kno  Tsn  not  contested  that  the  conquerors  oi' 

1  The  philosopher  HsUn  7V:  Sun  Ch'mg,  cf.  Chap.  XXXII. 
， Vid.  Chap.  XXXVII  and  the  Catalogue  of  Literature,  Han-^hu  chap.  30. 
*  The  philosophers  of  egoism  and  altruism,  both  combated  by  Mencius 
4  The  philosopher  Han  Fei  TV  was  the  son  of  a  Duke  of  the  Han  Sute 
in  Shanni, 

6» 


Digitized  by  Google 


84  Lun-H^ng :  A.  Biographical. 

empires  had  not  alighted  from  their  horses  nor  changed  their 
martial  habits,  Lu  Chin  would  not  have  written  his  memorials.1  If 
the  truth  had  not  been  lost  everywhere,  and  scientific  researches 
not  been  in  a  state  of  great  confusion,  the  discussions  of  Hunn 
Tan  would  not  havf  come  forth. 

Ergo,  when  worthies  and  sages  write  something,  they  do  not 
do  so  for  nothing,  but  have  their  good  reasons.  Thus  their  writ- 
ings are  by  no  means  purposeless,  but  conducive  to  reforms,  and 
their  reforms  to  re-establish  the  right  principles. 

Accordingly  the  Han  created  the  censoratc  to  review  books 
aud  examine  their  contents.  Tung  Chung  Sliu  wrote  a  book  on 
magical  arts,  in  which  h<>  sj>oke  much  about  calamitous  events  as 
being  caused  by  the  faults  of  the  government.  When  the  book 
was  complete,  and  the  text  revised,  it  was  presented  to  tlio  Im- 
perial Court  of  the  I  Ian.  Chu  Fit  Yen  from  jealousy  slandered  the 
book  in  a  memorial  to  the  (liroiic.  The  einpemr  handed  Tung  Chung 
Shu  over  to  the  tribunal,  and  the  judges  declared  tliat  ho  was  very 
stupid,  and  deservi'd  to  die,  but  tlic  emperor  pardoned  him.  Ihuio 
Wu  Ti  did  not  ])iinisli  Tung  Chung  S/nt  for  his  remarks  on  calam- 
ities, on  tlie  contrary,  he  honoured  him.  How  mucli  more  would 
lie  liave  done  so  for  Twig  Chung  Sim's  inoflTonsivc  utterances,  for 
liis  researches  into  tlie  nature  of  the  fundamental  principles  and 
his  collection  of  old  and  true  sayings? 

As  long  as  a  wise  man  holds  at)  official  position  in  tins  world, 
he  is  perfectly  loyal  to  】iis  sovereign,  and  propagates  liis  reforms 
to  enlighten  tlie  government.  Wliea  he  has  retired,  lie  still  teaches 
and  criticises  to  rouse  the  simple-minded  who  have  gone  astray. 
Thoy  cannot  find  their  way  back  to  tlie  right  path,  their  prin- 
ciples are  shallow,  and  their  doings  wrong.  Unless  we  scholars 
hurry  to  their  rescu«\  they  come  to  perdition,  and  do  not  awake 
from  their  slumber.^ This  has  prompted  me  to  write  tlie  Lun-hing. 


1  An  allusion  to  an  event  in  tlie  life  of  Lu  Chin,  narrated  in  his  biography. 
Shi-rhi  chap.  i»7  p.  7.  When  Im  Chin  had  returned  from  his  successful  mission  to  the 
King  of  Ywht  whom  he  induced  to  acknowledge  tlic  suzerainty  of  the  Han,  Kao 
Ttu  conferred  a  high  rank  upon  him.  Subsequently,  when  relating  his  adventures, 
Lu  Chia  would  always  refer  to  poetry  and  history.  The  emperor  displeased  with 
thejie  utterances,  told  him  that  he  had  won  liis  laurels  on  horseback,  why  nmst  he 
make  sncli  a  fuss  about  literature.  Tl>en  Ln  <  ,hi"  showed  him,  how  former  con- 
qucrore  had  lost  the  empire  again,  if  they  had  not  consolidated  their  power  by  tlie 
arts  of  peace.  Thi«  conversation  with  the  emperor  lead  to  the  rotnposition  of  a 
series  of  uicniurials,  iti  which  Lu  ( 'Uia  developed  his  ideas  about  goveniment.  This 
I'ollcction  of  memorials  rereived  the  title  "  New  Wonb     llmn-yii,  cf.  Cliap.  XXX VII. 


Digitized  by  Goo' 


Replies  in  Self-Defenae. 


85 


In  a  great  many  books  reality  has  no  place  left :  falsehood 
and  immorality  triumph  over  truth  aud  virtue.  Therefore,  unless 
such  lies  be  censured,  specious  arguments  cannot  be  suppressed, 
and,  as  long  as  they  spread,  truth  does  not  reign.  For  this  reason 
the  Lun-Mng  weighs  the  words,  whether  they  be  light  or  heavy, 
and  holds  up  a  balance  for  truth  and  falsehood.  It  does  not  trouble 
about  polishing  the  phrases  aud  embellishing  the  style,  or  consider 
this  of  great  importance. 

It  haa  its  raison  d'Mre  in  the  innate  human  weakness.  Con- 
sequently it  criticises  the  common  people  most  vigorously.  By 
nature  these  people  are  very  prone  to  strange  words  and  to  the 
use  of  falsehoods.  Why?  Because  simple  truisms  do  not  appeal  to 
the  imagination,  whereas  elegant  inventions  puzzle  tlie  hearers,  and 
impress  their  minds.  Therefore,  men  of  genius,  who  are  fond  of 
discussions,  will  magnify  aud  exaggerate  the  truth,  aud  use  flowery 
language.  Masters  of  style,  tliey  simply  invent  things,  and  tell 
stories,  which  never  happened.  Their  hearers  believe  in  them,  and 
are  never  tired  of  repeating  them.  Their  readei-s  take  these  stories 
for  facts,  aud  oue  trausuiiU  them  to  the  other  in  an  unbroken  chain 
so,  that  at  last  the  words  are  engraved  ou  bamboo  and  silk.  Being 
repeated  over  and  over  again,  tl"'se  stories  iui])ose  even  upon  the 
wise.  May  be  that  even  His  Majesty  honours  such  a  man  as  a 
t earlier,  and  spreads  his  forgeries,  and  that  magistrates  and  wearers 
of  ml  girdle  pendantti 1  all  read  these  inventions. 

He  who  knows  how  to  discriminate  between  truth  and  false- 
hood, must  feel  a  pung  at  it;  why  should  lie  nut  speak  ；'  Menciua  was 
grieved  that  the  discussions  of  Yang  (■■'/'«  and  Me  Ti  did  great  liarm 
to  the  cause  ot"  Coutuciaiiism,  therefore  he  used  plain  and  straight- 
forward language  to  recinnuit'iid  what  was  riglit,  and  to  reject  what 
was  wrong.  People  fancied  that  he  wa«  a  controversialist,  but 
Mettcitts  replied,  "  How  should  L  be  a  controversialist?  I  cannot  do 
otherwise."2 

Now  1  also  cannot  do  otherwise.  Lies  and  folly  appear  in 
the  garb  of  truth,  veracity  and  sincerity  arc  superseded  by  im- 
posture. People  are  iu  a  state  of  apathy,  right  and  wroug  are  not 
determined,  purple  and  vermilion  coufounded,3  and  tiles  mixed  up 
with  jade-stones.  As  regards  my  feelings,  how  could  my  heart 
endure  such  a  state?  The  lackey  in  Wei  riding  the  outer  horse 

1  Princes  aud  nobles. 

， Menciu*  Bk.  III，  Pt.  II,  chap.  IX,  1. 

3  Vermilion  is  regarded  as  a  primary  colour,  and  much  liked,  purple  as 
secondary,  and  not  much  esteemed. 


Digitized  by  Google 


8G 


Liui-Heng:  A.  Biographical. 


transgressed  his  functions,  crying  out  ibr  the  carriage.  His  sym- 
pathy carried  him  away,  for  lie  was  appreliendiug  a  danger  for 
his  prince. 1  Critics  cominiserate  the  world,  and  feel  sorry  for  its 
deceptions,  a  sentiinent  ！ similar  to  that  of  the  outrider  in  Wei.  A 
sorrowful  mind  and  a  melancholy  spirit  disturb  the  tranquil  fluid 
in  our  breaat,  whicli  tells  upon  our  years,  shortens  our  span, 
and  is  not  beneficial  to  our  life.  It  is  a  greater  misfortune  thau 
that  suffered  by  Yen  //«i,2  and  against  the  rules  of  Huang  Ti  and 
Lao  Tse、  and  nolhiug  wliich  men  like  to  do.  Hut  there  was  no 
help,  therclore  I  wrote  the  Lun-heng.  Its  style  is  indill'erent,  but 
the  meaning  all  right,  the  diction  bad,  but  the  teeling  good.  The 
Chmg-wu  treats  of  tin*  system  ol'  government  ；  all  the  chapters  of 
the  Lung-heng  may  be  read  by  ordinary  people,  for  it  is  like  writ- 
ings of  other  scholars. 

As  for  the  Nine  Inventions  and  the  Three  Exaggerations,  and 
the  essays  ou  Death  and  on  Ghosts,4  the  world  has  long  been  led 
astray  by  tlie  errors  exposed  therein,  aud  people  did  not  become 
aware  of  it. 

When  a  ruler  goea  wrong,  representations  must  be  addressed 
to  the  highest  place,  when  the  citizens  are  blindfold,  one  speaks 
to  them.  If  this  be  of  ell'ect,  their  leader  will  learn  also.  1  fer- 
vently desire  to  rouse  the  misguided  minds,  and  to  teach  them,  how 
to  tell  tlie  full  from  the  hollow.  As  soon  as  the  difference  of 
reality  and  emptiness  is  fully  untleretoiid,  specious  arguments  will 
be  discarded,  aud  then  the  progress  made  iu  true  and  real  know- 
ledge will  daily  increase. 


Sonic  say  that  the  sages  create,  whereas  the  worthies  relate, 
and  that,  if  worthies  create,  it  is  wrong.  The  Lwi-hhig  and  tlie 
Chiiig-wu  are  creations,  they  think.  These  works  arc  neither  crea- 
tions nor  relations.  The  Five  Classics  can  be  regarded  as  ert'a- 
tious.  The  History  of  the  Grand  Annalist, s  the  Introduction  of 
Liu  Tse  ChSng,0  aud  the  Records  of  Pan  S/m  P  i1  may  be  called 

«  Cf.  p.  154. 

3  The  favourite  disciple  of  Confucius,  who  died  vory  young,  d:  Oiap.  XXXIII, 

5  Another  of  Wany  Ch'uny's  works,  whicli  haa  been  lost. 

*  Lan-himg  N.  16-24,  N.  25-27,  N.  (.2  and  (»5  (cf.  p.  48  seq.  and  p.  f>7  aeq.). 

1  The  Shi-ckL 

«  The  Hsm-hgii. 

7  Pan  Shu  P'i  =  Pan  Piao,  the  father  of  the  historian  Pan  Ku.  He  also  waa 
devoted  to  the  study  of  history,  and  intended  to  continue  the  Shi-chi,  wliich  wa， 
iiually  doue  by  his  sou. 


Replies  in  Self- Defense. 


87 


relations,  and  the  il  Netv  Reflections " 1  of  Huan  C/iUn  S/tan  and  the 
" Ciitiftd  Hejlectittns  "2  of  1'sou  Po  Chi,3  discussions.  Now  the  JLun- 
hing  and  the  Ching-wu  are  like  the  two  Reflections  of  limn  Cltiin 
S/ttm  aud  Tson  R>  Chi,  and  not  wliat  they  call  creations. 

To  produce  somethiug  new  that  did  not  exist  in  the  past, 
as  I'sang  ILsieh*  invented  writing  and  list  Clttrng^  chariots,  is  creat- 
ing. The  Yi-k'mg  says  of  Fu  I  hi  that  lie  created  the  eight  dia- 
grams. They  did  not  exist  before,  and  Fu  list  made  them,"  hence 
the  term  creating  is  used.  Whi  Wwig  evolved  these  eight  pictures, 
and  brought  their  number  up  to  sixty-four,  which  is  called  am- 
plifying. To  say  that  the  composition  of  the  Lun-Mng  is  similar  tt) 
that  of  the  sixty-four  figures  is  not  correct  either.  In  regard  to  tlte 
sixty-four  diagrams,  these  figures  were  increased  by  an  amplification 
of  their  forms,  aud  their  number  was  thus  augmented.  Now  in  the 
Lun-hing  the  current  literature  is  taken  up  with  the  object  of  defining 
right  and  wrong  aud  distinguishing  between  truth  and  falsehood.  It 
is  not  an  original  production  of  something  that  did  not  exist  pre- 
viously. The  Confucianists  take  the  sayings  of  former  teachers  and 
criticise  them,  as  clerks  subject  the  decisions  of  the  lord  chief-justice 
to  a  new  examination.  If  tlie  trrm  creating  be  applied  to  the  Lun-heng, 
would  tlie  same  word  be  used  of  tlie  Confucian isU  and  the  clerks? 

In  their  reports  to  the  throne  and  their  memorials  the  me- 
morialists use  to  propose  useful  measures.  There  is  always  the 
dt'sire  to  help  the  government.  Now  tlie  creators  of  classical  works 
are  like  those  memorialists.  Tlieir  words  proceed  from  the  inner- 
most heart,  and  it  is  their  hand  which  reduces  them  to  writing. 
Both  cases  are  identical,  lu  regard  to  those  who  address  the  em- 
peror one  speaks  of  memorialising,  whereas  for  those  records  an- 
other word  lias  been  adopted  vie.  writing. 

Duriug  the  (irst  years  oi"  Chien-dt  u,7  there  was  a  great  dearth 
iu  Chuny-chou*    The  people  from  Ym-diuanv  and  Jii-nan 10  had  to 

1  Cf.  Chap.  XXXVU. 

2  CAien-ltm. 

， Cf.  Chap.  XXXVII. 

*  A  mythical  per»onage. 

' Another  legendary  person,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a  descendant  of  Huwiy 
Ti  and  director  of  chariots  under  J «. 

r>  Vid.  Chap.  XXXVI,  where  Wang  ('h'tiny  maintains  that  Fu  H»i  did  not 
make  the  diagrams,  but  received  them  in  a  supernatural  way. 

1  The  first  year  of  the  emperor  lhattg  Ti:  76  a.d. 

•  An  old  name  for  Honan. 
' A  circuit  io  Anlnu. 

10  A  place  io  Honan. 


Digitized  by  Google 


88 


Lun-H^Dg:  A.  Biographical. 


leave  their  homes,  and  were  scattered  in  all  directions.  His  Holy 
Majesty  felt  very  much  distressed,  and  many  edicts  were  issued. 
The  writer  of  the  Lun-h^ng  presented  a  report 1  to  the  prefect, 
urging  that  ull  dissipations  and  extravagancies  should  be  prohibited 
in  order  to  provide  for  tlie  time  of  need.  His  suggestions  were 
not  accepted  however.  He  went  home  and  entitled  th«  draft  of 
his  report  "  Provisions  for  Times  of  Want." 

When  the  grain  is  used  for  the  destination  of  wine,  robbery 
is  rampant,  aucl  as  long  as  there  is  inuoli  drunkeness,  robberies 
never  cease.  In  a  memorial  sent  to  the  prelect  the  writer  proposed 
that  the  use  oi'  spirits  should  be  interdicted,  and  afterwards  gave 
to  this  report  the  name  "  Prohibition  of  Spirits."  From  tliis  it  may 
be  seen  that  the  writing  of  the  classical  authors  is  like  that  of 
memorialists.  Those  reports  are  regarded  as  independent  creations 
presented  to  the  emperor.  Reports  and  memorials  to  the  throne 
are  always  creations. 

In  the  Ch' ing  of  CI"",  the  1'  lut-wu  of  C'A  «,a  and  the  Ck  un- 
til iu  of  Lu  persons  and  things  are  all  different.  As  regards  the 
diagrams  ch  'ten  and  k'un  of  the  Yiking,  the  yuan3  of  the  Ch'un-ch'iu 
and  the  mystical  principle  "f  Yang  Tse  Yiln,  they  use  diverse  terms 
for  diviuatioa  and  time  periods.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  the 
Lun-hmg  and  the  CMng-tm  have  the  same  aim  hs  the  memorials  of 
7，  ang  Lin  and  the  essays  of  A'm  Yung. 

The  Han  time  is  very  rich  in  literary  talents,  and  the  number 
of  essays  is  especially  large.  Yang  Ch  eng  Tse  Cliaiig  produced  the 
Yo^h-ching  *  and  Ynny  Tsc  Yiln  the  7 '  ui-lmUm-cli ing.  These  two  books 
were  current  in  tlie  rourt  and  read  in  the  side-halls.  Tlie  impression 
they  caused  、vau  enormous,  tliey  were  not  relations  but  creations, 
ami  people  doubted,  whether  the  ingenious  authors  were  not  sages. 
The  court  found  uothing  to  blame  in  them.  Now,  fancy  the  Lun- 
Uhif}  with  its  minute  discussions  and  thorough  arguments,  intended 
to  explain  tlie  comuion  errors  and  elucidate  the  right  and  wrong 
principles  so,  that  future  generations  can  clearly  see  the  diflerence 
between  truth  aud  falsehood  ！  Lest  all  this  be  lost,  I  have  com- 
mitted it  to  the  writiug  tablets:  remarks  on  dmpters  aud  passages 
of  the  classics  of  our  ancestors,  and  on  queer  sayings  oi*  former 

1  A  report  for  the  emperor,  which  Waruj  Chumj,  not  being  of  sutTiciontJy 
high  rank,  could  not  present  directly. 

a  The  official  chronicles  of  these  two  States.    {Ct\  Chap.  XXXVI.) 

3  A  term  employed  for  tlie  first  year  of  a  sovereign,  also  denoting  the  original 
fluid  of  nature. 

4  Tlie  *•  Cla^ic  of  Music." 


Digitizedby  google 


Replies  i"  Sell- Defense. 


89 


masters.  I  offer  critical  remarks  and  reject  many  common  traditions. 
The  delusion  caused  by  such  traditions  and  the  spread  of  so  many 
lying  books  give  endless  pain  to  tlie  knowing.  Confucius  gaitl: ― "  Wheu 
a  man  is  touched  by  poetry,  lie  cannot  remain  silent.  When  I  arn 
moved,  I  cannot  keep  quiet,  but  must  speak." 

Jade  is  being  confounded  witli  stones.  People  cannot  distinguish 
it,  as  lor  instance  the  inspector  of  works  in  Ch'u  took  jade  lor  a 
stone,  and  suddenly  ordered  Pien  Ho  to  have  Lis  foot  cut  off. 1  Right 
is  being  turned  into  wrong,  and  falsehood  into  truth.  How  is  it 
possible  not  to  speak  of  it? 

As  the  common  traditions  are  full  of  exaggerations,  so  the 
conuuou  books  teem  with  falsehoods.  Tsoh  Yen  e.  g.  pretends  that 
our  world2  is  one  continent,  and  that  beyond  the  four  sens  there 
are  still  nine  other  continents  like  our  world. :t  //，""•  Nan  Tse  says 
in  his  book  that,  wheu  Kung  Ku'wj,  fighting  for  the  throne  with 
L'huan  Ilsil,  was  not  victorious,  he  ran  agaiust  Muuut  Ptt-chou  in  his 
wrath  so,  that  he  caused  the  "  Pillar  of  Heaven "  to  break,  and 
the  confines  of  the  earth  to  be  smashed.4  In  Yaos  time  ten  suns 
appeared  simultaneously.  Yao  shot  an  arrow  at  nine  of  them.5 
During  the  battle  fought  by  the  Duke  of  L"-yangn  the  sun  went 
down.  Swinging  his  spear  he  beckoned  to  the  sun,  when  he  catne 
back.  There  are  a  great  many  books  and  records  of  a  similar 
nature  iu  the  world.  Truth  and  reality  are  drowned  in  a  Hood  of 
inveutiuns  and  fabricatious.  Can  we  remain  silent,  when  our  heart 
swells  to  overflowing,  and  the  pencil  trembles  in  our  hand? 

Discussing  a  question  we  must  examine  into  it  with  our  mind, 
and  demonstrate  it  by  facts,  and,  if  there  be  any  inventions,  proofs 
must  be  given.  As  the  history  of  the  Grand  .Annalist  testifies, 
Hxii  Yu1  did  not  hide,  nor  did  Tan,  tlie  crown-priuce  of  Yen,  cause 
the  sun  to  revert  to  the  meridian.  Nobody  cau  read  these  pas- 
sages without  applauding. 


' Cf.  p.  113. 
， China. 

8  Cf.  Chap.  XIX. 
*  Vid.  Chap.  XIX. 
s  Cf.  Chap.  XX. 

e  A  city  in  Jlonan.  We  learn  from  the  L  in-ht'ng  V，  6v.  (Kan-ksu)  that  this 
battle  was  foUglit  by  Duke  II、ia'iy  of  Lit  against  Han.  This  prince  reigiied  from 
572  to  541.  Iluai  Xan  T»  VI,  1、、,  liowover,  from  wliom  tliia  passage  is  quoted,  speaks 
of  the  Duke  of  Lu-yany  and  the  comniciitary  rcinurks  that  tliiii  was  a  grandson  of 
King  V ing  of  ('/hi  (52S-515),  called  Lu  yunj  W'rn  TV  in  the  Kuo-yu. 

7  A  legendary  lierniil  »f 】W '-  tiute.    (Cf.  Chap.  XXXV.J 


Digitized  by  Google 


90 


Luti-Hnig:  A.  Biographical. 


I  composed  the  Cyng-u  u  (or  the  purpose  of  showing  to  the 
incuinbeuts  of  the  prelect  urea  aud  the  district  magistrates,  what  is  of 
paramount  importance  iu  the  administration,  and  with  a  view  to  in- 
duce all  people  to  relbmi  aud  gratefully  acknowledge  tlie  kindness  of 
the  government.  The  nine  chapters  of  the  Lun-Ung  on  Inventions  aud 
the  three  chapters  ou  Exaggerations  are  intended  to  impress  upon 
people  that  they  must  strive  Cor  truthfulness,  and  the  chapters  on  Death 
and  Ci hosts1  shall  induce  them  to  give  their  dead  a  simple  burial. 

Confuciius  avoided  all  ptmip,  but  people  were  very  extravagant 
i"  burying  the  dead  and  decorating  the  coffin.  Liu  Tse  Cheny  was 
iu  favour  of  simple  fuuerals,  but  people  would  put  costly  things 
iuto  tlie  graves,  and  spare  no  money.  Kitang  Wu  7V  regarded  straw 
carriages  and  riH'd  horses  as  sui'liciently  good  objects  for  the  sacri- 
ficial worship  of  the  dead.  Wljy  do  the  common  books  and  tra- 
ditions not  mention  this?  The  belief  in  the  talk  on  death  lias 
defiled  them. 

Now  I  have  written  the  essays  ou  Death  and  on  the  False 
Reports  about  the  Dead2  to  show  that  the  deceased  have  uo  oouscious- 
ness,  and  cannot  become  ghosts,  hoping  that,  sua  soon  as  my  readers 
have  grasped  this,  they  will  restrain  the  extravagance  of  the  burials, 
and  become  more  economical.  Such  would  be  the  advantage  derived 
from  the  Lun-heng.  Provided  that  my  words  have  this  effect,  what 
would  it  matter,  if  my  work  were  a  creation? 

The  writing  of  Tsang  JJsi^h  is  universally  used  to  record  tilings, 
the  carriages  of  /hi  Chung  for  locomotion,  the  clothes  of  Po  Yu  as 
a  protection  against  beat  and  cold,  and  the  tiled  houses  of  Chieh 
to  keep  off  wind  aud  rain.3  If,  irrespective  of  their  usefulness  or 
ubnoxiousness,  su^h  things  be  solely  found  fault  with  for  being  in- 
novations, then  men  like  Ta  ang  H.sieh  would  have  to  be  coudeuinecl, 
and  the  fifteen  dynasties  at  the  beginning  of  history  all  be  blame- 
worthy.4 Provided  tliat  a  tiling  be  useful,  there  iu  no  harm,  eveu  if  it 
should  be  an  inuovation,  and  if  there  be  no  harm,  what  can  be  amiss? 

In  ancient  times  great  public  entertainniente  were  given  by- 
imperial  order  with  the  object  of  seeing  the  customs  and  learning 


1  Cf.  pp.  57  and  58. 

a  Lan-hrng  N.  62  and  63. 

s  The  tyrant  Chieh  is  reported  to  have  built  the  first  brick  houses  、Ti- 
wany-'ihi-cht). 

*  The  ten  dynasties  of  the  fabulous  age  of  Chinese  history  together  with  the 
Five  Emperoi*M  and  their  houses,  whom  Chinese  tancy  has  credited  with  the  inventiou 
of  all  the  fuiidauieutal  institutions  of  civilisation,  audi  as  house  building,  dress  making, 
writiug,  etc 


Digitized  by  Google 


Replies  in  Self- Defense. 


91 


the  feelings  of  the  people.  Thon  the  Odes '  originated  among  the 
people.  The  holy  emperors  might  have  said,  "  Ye,  people,  liow 
dare  you  produce  such  novel  things?,"  and  have  thrown  them  into 
prison,  and  destroyed  their  Otles.  This  was  not  done,  and  the 
Odes  were  thus  Itanded  down.  Now  the  Lun-heng  and  the  Ch^ng- 
wu  are  like  the  Odes.  I  trust  that  they  will  not  be  condeiiined, 
before  they  have  been  perused. 

This  is  the  origin  of  the  Lun-hhtg.  The  reason  why  people 
so  often  take  exception  to  new  protluetions  is  that  they  often  contain 
so  many  unfounded  assertions  and  disparaging  remarks  on  others. 
The  Lun-hhig  aims  at  truth  and  dislikes  all  wild  speculations.  The 
chapters  entitled:  —  C/i  i-js/iiJi,'1  Jhfhtn  Han,  Hui  leuo,  and  Ym-fu 8  are 
full  of  praise  and  well-dcservod  applause,4  and  not  disparaging  at 
all.    Such  a  creation  might  well  escape  reproach. 

1  The  Odes  of  the  Shi-king. 
*  "  Equality  of  the  agtw." 

»  Contained  in  Books  XVIII  and  XIX,  N.  5«— 59. 

4  Wang  ('h'uny  eulogise-s  the  eni|ternrs  of  his  own  time,  and  places  them  on 
a  level  with  the  model  sovereigns  of  aiitiquity. 


■  s  . 


Digitized  by  Google 


92 


Luii  Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


CHAPTER  III. 
Spontaneity  (Tse-jan). 

By  the  fusion  of  the  fluids  of  Heaven  and  Earth  all  things 
of  the  world  are  produced  spontaneously,  just  as  by  the  mixture 
of  the  fluids  of  husband  and  wife  children  are  born  spontaneously. 
Among  tlie  things  thus  produced,  creatures  witli  blood  in  their 
veins  are  sensitive  of  huuger  and  cold.  Seeing  that  grain  can  be 
eaten,  t\wy  use  it  as  food,  and  discovering  tliat  silk  and  hemp  cau 
be  worn,  they  take  it  as  raiment.  Some  people  are  of  opinion  that 
Heaven  produces  grain  for  the  purpose  of  feeding  mankind,  and 
silk  and  hemp  to  cloth  them.  That  would  be  tantamount  to  making 
Heaven  tlie  farmer  of  man  or  his  mulberry  girl,'  it  would  not  be 
in  accordance  witli  spontaneity,  tlierelore  this  opinion  is  very 
questionable  aud  unacceptable. 

lieasoning  on  Taoist  principles  we  find  that  Heaven  emits 
its  fluid  everywhere.  Among  the  many  things  of  tliis  world  grain 
dispels  hunger,  and  silk  and  licmp  protect  from  cold.  For  that 
reason  man  eats  grain,  and  wears  silk  and  hemp.  That  Heaven 
does  not  produce  grain,  silk,  and  hemp  purposely,  in  order  to  teed 
and  cloth  mankind,  follows  from  the  fact  that  by  calamitous  changes 
it  d«>es  not  intend  to  reprove  man.  Things  are  produced  spontane- 
ously, and  man  wears  and  eats  them;  the  fluid  changes  spontane- 
ously, anil  man  is  frightened  by  it,  for  the  usual  theory  is  dis- 
heartening. Where  would  be  spontaneity,  if  the  heavenly  signs 
were  iutentional,  and  where  inaction?2 

Why  must  we  assume  that  Heaven  acts  spontaneously?  Be- 
cause it  has  neither  mouth  nor  eyes.  Activity  is  connected  with 
the  mouth  aud  the  eyes :  the  mouth  wishes  to  eat,  and  the  eyes  to 
see.  These  desires  withiu  manifest  themselves  without.  That  the 
mouth  and  the  eyes  are  craving  tor  something,  wliich  is  considered 
an  advantage,  is  due  to  those  desires.  Now,  provided  tliat  tlie 
muuth  and  the  eye  do  not  aH'ect  things,  there  is  notliiiig  w  liicli 
they  might  long  ior,  why  should  there  be  activity  then? 

1  Wlio  feeds  the  aiikworms. 

- Inaciion  does  not  mean  luotionlessness,  but  spontaneous  action  without  aiiy 
aiiii  or  puiputtc.   U  is  uiuie  or  less  iuechaiiical,  and  not  indued  by  a  coiuciuu-t  spirit. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spontaneity. 


03 


How  do  wo  know  tliat  Heaven  possesses  neither  mouth  nor 
eyes?  From  Earth.  The  body  of  the  Earth  is  formed  of  earth, 
and  earth  has  neither  mouth  nor  eyes.  Heaven  and  Earth  are  like 
husband  and  wife.  Since  the  body  of  the  Earth  is  not  provided 
with  a  mouth  or  eyes,  wc  know  that  Heaven  has  no  mouth  or 
eves  neither.  Supposing  that  Heaven  has  a  body,  then  it  must  be 
like  that  of  the  Eartli,  and  should  it  be  air  only,  this  air  would 
be  like  clouds  and  fog.  How  can  a  cloudy  or  nebular  substance 
have  a  mouth  or  an  eye? 

Some  one  might  argue  that  every  movement  is  originally  in- 
action. There  is  desire  provoking  the  movement,  and,  as  soon  as 
there  is  motion,  there  is  action.  The  movements  of  Heaven  are 
similar  to  those  of  man,  \m\\  could  tliev  be  inactive?  I  reply  that, 
when  Heaven  moves,  it  emits  its  fluid.  Its  body  moves,  the  fluid 
comos  fortli,  anil  tiling  are  produced.  When  man  moves  his  fluid, 
his  body  moves,  his  fluid  tlien  comes  forth,  ami  a  child  is  pro- 
duced. Man  emitting  his  fluid  does  not  intend  to  beg，'t  a  child, 
yet  the  fluid  be'mfi  emitted,  thq  cliild  is  born  of  itself.  When 
Heaven  is  moving,  it  does  not  desire  to  produce  tilings  thereby, 
but  tilings  are  produced  of  tlieir  own  accord.  That  is  spontaneity, 
letting  out  its  fluid  it  does  not  desire  to  create  things,  but  things 
are  created  of  themselves.    That  is  inaction. 

But  liow  is  tlie  fluid  of  Heaven,  which  we  credit  with  spon- 
taneity and  inaction?  It  is  placid,  tranquil,  desireless,  inactive, 
and  unbusied.  Imo  Tse  acquired  long  life  by  it.  lie  obtained  it 
from  Heaven.  If  Heaven  did  not  possess  this  fluid,  how  could 
Lao  Tse  have  obtained  this  nature?  For  it  does  not  happen  tliat 
the  disciples  alone  speak  of  something,  whirli  their  master  never 
mentioned. 

Perhaps  this  nature  appeared  again  in  Duke  //， 婦，' who  was 
wont  to  say,  tk Let  Kuan  Chung2  know."  His  attendants  replied,  "is  it 
so  easy  to  rule,  if  Kitan  Chung  is  always  the  first  and  second  word? " 
The  duke  rejoined,  "  Before  I  had  secured  the  services  of  Kuan  Chung, 
I  was  in  the  greatest  difficulties,  now,  after  I  have  got  l"in，  1  find 
even-tiling  easy."  When  Duke  Ihuin  had  taken  Kunn  Chung  into 
his  service,  lie  left  the  affairs  to  him,  entrusted  him  witli  the  ad- 
ministration, and  did  not  trouble  any  more  about  it.  Should  high 
Heaven,  whicli  in  its  exalted  virtue  confns  the  government  upon 
au  emperor,  reprove  man,  its  virtue  wi>u!d  he  inferior  to  that  of 


Duke  Huan  of  Ch'i,  683-<541  B.r. 

Duke  Huan'^  famous  minister.    Cf.  j).  176. 


Digitized  by  Google 


04 


Lun-Hrng:  B.  Metapliysiral. 


Duke  Huan,  and  the  conduct  of  a  feudatory  prince  surpass  that  of 
great  Heaven. 

Somebody  might  object  that  Duke  Ihtan  knew  Kuan  Chung 
to  be  a  wise  man.  and  therefore  appointed  him,  and  that  but  for 
Ktmn  Chung  he  would  also  have  given  veut  to  ltis  displeasure. 
Meeting  with  men  like  Y.ao  and  S/nw  Heaven  would  certainly  not 
have  reprimanded  people  either. 

I  beg  to  reply,  that,  if  Heaven  can  reprimand,  it  might 
as  well  purposely  appoint  a  wise  prince,  select  a  genius  like  Yon 
and  SJtun,  confer  the  imperial  dignity  up<ui  him,  and  leave  the 
affains  of  the  empire  to  him  without  taking  further  notice  of 
them.  Now  it  is  iliflorent.  Ilraven  creates  very  inferior  princes, 
who  have  no  principles,  and  neglect  virtue,  and  therefore  has  to 
reprove  them  every  now  and  tlien.  Would  it  not  be  afraid  of 
the  trouble? 

Tsao  '/Van,1  a  minister  of  the  Han,  was  given  to  wine, 
songs,  and  music,  and  did  not  care  about  government.  When 
his  son  remonstrated  with  him.  lie  jajave  him  two  hundred  blows 
with  the  bamboo.  At  that  period  there  was  uo  insurrection 
in  the  empire.  Iu  llum-yang^  people  coined  counterfeit  money, 
and  the  officials  were  |)owerless  to  clieck  the  abuse.  Chi  Yen 3 
was  prefect  then.  He  did  not  destroy  a  single  furnace,  or  pun- 
ish a  single  individual.  Quite  indifferent,  he  was  comfortably 
reclining  on  his  couch,  and  the  conditions  of  Huni-ynng  became 
woll  ordered  again.  7:s:"«  Tsan  behaved  himsdf,  as  though  he 
were  not  a  minister,  and  Chi  Yen  administered  his  prefecture, 
as  if  nobody  were  living  in  it.  Albeit  yet  the  empire  of  the 
Han  lmd  no  troubles,  and  in  Ihuii-yang  the  punishments  could 
be  tlisroiitiriued.  So  perfect  was  the  virtue  of  Tsao  Tsan,  and 
so  imposing  Chi  Yens  dignity.  The  majesty  of  Heaven  and 
its  virtue  are  quite  sonicthing  else  than  those  of  Tsao  Tsan 
and  (hi  Yen,  but  to  affirm  that  Heaven  entrusts  an  emporor 
with  the  government,  and  tlien  reproves  him,  would  amount 
to  nothing  less  than  that  Heaven's  virtue  is  not  as  t'xalted 
as  that  of  Tsao  Tsan,  and  its  majesty  not  as  imposing  as  that 
of  CM  Yen. 


1  One  of  the  counsellors  and  supporters  of  Han  Kao  T\it，  died  190  b.c.  On 
his  lai.^cr  fairr  policy  vid.  his  biography  in  the  Slti-chi  chap.  54. 

2  A  State  in  Honan. 

3  A  minister  of  the  emperor  V\  u  Ti，  like  T  mo  Tmn  a  follower  of  the 
doctrine  of  inaction  inculcated  by  Lao  T.、,..  His  policy  of  governing  consisted  in 
letting  things  alone. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spontaneity.  95 

Wlien  Chn  Po  Yn1  was  governing  Wei,  Tse  Kung  asked  liim 
through  somebody,  how  he  governed  Wei.  The  reply  was,  "I 
govern  it  by  not  governing."— Government  by  not  governing  is 
inaction  as  a  principle. 

Some  opponent  might  say  that  as  a  sequel  of  universal  peace 
a  plan  came  forth  from  the  Yelloir  Hirer,  and  a  scroll  from  the  ho? 
Without  (1  rawing  no  plan  can  be  made,  and  without  action  nothing 
is  coinj)l«^te(l.  The  fact  that  Ilfaven  and  Earth  produced  the  plan 
and  the  Hcroll  shows  that  they  are  active,  tlu*y  think. ― Wlien 
Chmig  Littng  was  walking  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Sse,  he  met 
the  "  Yellow  Stone  Genius,"3  wlio  gave  him  the  'k  minister's  hook."4 
Heaven  was  supporting  the  FJan  and  destroying  the  Ch  in,  therefore 
lie  ordered  a  spiritual  stone  to  change  into  a  ghost.  That  a  book 
was  handed  to  somebody  is  again  considered  a  proof  of  activity. 

I  am  of  opinion  that  all  this  was  spontaneous,  for  how  could 
Heaven  take  a  brush  and  ink,  and  draw  tlie  plan,  or  write  the 
scroll?  The  principle  of  Heaven  is  spontaneity,  consequently  the 
plan  and  tht;  book  must  liavo  been  produced  of  themsclvt-s. 

T'ang  Shu  Yfl  of  Chin 5  and  Ch  ^ng  Chi  Yo  of  Im^  had  a  char- 
acter in  their  hands,  wlien  th«'v  were  born,  tliereforc  one  was 
called  Yil,  the  other  Yo.  When  Ch  uug  Tse  of  Sung 7  was  born,  tlie 
characters  "Duchess  of  Lu"  were  written  on  her  palm.  Tliesf  letters 
must  have  been  written,  wliile  the  three  persons  were  still  in  their 
•mother's  womb.  If  、、','  say  tliat  Heaven  wrote  tliem,  .while  tlicy 
were  in  their  motlier's  womb,  did  Heaven  J»erliaps  send  a  spirit 
with  a  style,  a  brush,  and  ink  to  engrave  and  write  the  characters 


1  A  disciple  of  (  on/uchf.^  cf.  Chap.  XXXIII.  The  Tnoists  also  claim  him  as 
one  of  theirs,  Chuang  7^，  chap,  XXV,  33,  informs  us  that  "  wlien  C/iii  Po 】 ii 
reached  his  sixtieth  year,  he  cliatigcd  his  opinions.  What  he  had  previously  regarded 
as  right,  he  now  came  to  regard  as  wrong,"  i.  e.  from  a  (-onfucianist  lie  became  a 
Taoist,  and  as  such  upheld  the  principle  of  (juietism, 

1  Vid.  Chap.  XXII. 

»  Huang  Shih、  cf.  Chap.  XXX. 

4  From  this  mysterious  book  Charuj  Uang  is  believed  to  have  derived  liis 
plans  consolidating  the  power  of  the  Han  dynasty. 

*  T'ang  Shu%  the  younger  prince  of  T'ang,  was  a  son  of  King  VVw  Wang 
and  younger  brother  of  King  Ch%'ng  (1 1 15-1078).  lie  became  tho  founder  of  the 
princely  house  of  Chin.  Cf.  Shi-chi  cliap.  '\9  p.  lv  where  the  character  of  his  palm  ia 
likewise  referred  to. 

*  Chfeng  Chi  was  a  younger  son  of  Duke  Ihutn  of  Jai  (711-693).  We  read 
in  the  Shi-chi  chap.  33  p.  Viv  the  story  of  his  having  been  born  with  the  character 
To  in  his  hand. 

7  A  daughter  of  Duke  Wu  of  S"n9  (765-747  bx.)  who  became  married  to 
Duke  /lui  of  Lu.    Cf.  Chap.  XXU. 


Digitized  by  Google 


on 


Ltin-H*'ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


on  their  bodies?  The  spontaneity  of  these  processes  seems  dubious, 
and  is  difficult  to  understand.  Externally  there  seemed  to  be 
activity,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  was  spontaneity  internally. 
Thus  the  Grand  Annalist  recording  the  story  of  the  yellow  stone, 
lias  his  doubts,  but  cannot  find  the  truth.1  Viscount  Chien  of  Chao^ 
had  a  dream  that  lie  was  ascending  to  heaven.  There  he  saw  a 
lad  by  the  side  of  the  Ruler  of  Heaven.  When  he  went  out  sub- 
sequently, lie  perceived  a  young  man  in  the  street,  who  was  the 
one  whom  lie  bad  seen  previously  in  liis  dream  by  the  side  of 
the  Ruler  of  Hoavon.  This  must  be  regarded  as  a  lucky  augury 
the  future  flourishing  of  the  Chao  State,  as  the  transmission  of 
of  the.  book  by  tlie  "  yellow  stone  "  was  a  sign  of  tlie  rise  of  the 
Ihn  dynasty.  Tliat  tlie  supernatural  fluid  becomes  a  ghost,  and 
that  the  ghost  is  shaped  like  a  man,  is  spontaneous,  and  not  the 
work  of  anybody.  When  plants  and  trees  grow,  their  flowers  and 
leaves  are  onion  preen  and  have  crooked  and  broken  veins  like 
ornanipnts  If  【leaven  is  credited  \virl>  having  written  the  above 
mentioned  characters,  does  it  make  these  tlowers  and  leaves  also? 

In  the  State  of  Sung  a  man  carved  a  mulberry-leaf  of  wood, 
and  it  took  liim  three  years  to  complete  it.  Confttcius  said  "If  the 
Earth  required  tlireo  years  to  complete  one  leaf,  few  plants  would 
have  leaves."-'  According  to  this  dictum  of  Confitciits  the  leaves  of 
plants  grow  spontaneously,  and  for  that  reason  they  can  grow 
simultaneously.  If  Heaven  made  them,  their  growth  would  be  as 
much  delayed  as  the  carving  of  the  mulberry-leaf  by  tlie  man  of 
the  Swig  State. 

Let  us  look  at  tlie  hair  and  feathers  of  animals  and  birds, 
and  their  various  colours.  (、an  they  all  have  been  made?  If  so, 
animals  and  birds  would  never  he  quite  finished.  In  spring  we 
see  the  plants  growing,  and  in  autumn  we  see  them  full-grown. 
Can  Heaven  and  Karth  have  domi  this,  or  do  things  grow  spontane- 
ously? If  we  may  say  that  Heaven  and  Earth  have  done  it,  they 
must  have  used  hands  for  the  purpose.  Do  Heaven  and  Earth 
possess  many  thousand  or  many  ton  tliousand  hands  to  produce 
thousands  and  ten  thousands  of  things  at  the  same  time? 

' In  his  remarks  added  to  the  biography  of  f'hang  Liang  (Shi-rhi  chap-  55 
p.  lo)  Sf<  Ma  Cfi'frn  says  tliat  many  scholars  dc'i.v  the  existence  of  ghosts,  but  thnt 
the  story  of  the  yellow  stone  is  very  strange. 

3"  Cf.  Chap.  XV1L 

3  We  find  this  same  story  in  Lieh  T»e  VIII,  2  and  in  lluai  Xan  TV  XX,  2, 
but  hotli  authors  ascribe  the  words  pat.  in  the  moutli  of  <  •»"/"<■",.、  Iiere  to  Lieh  TV. 
Iliai  Kan  •/'.、■'  makes  tlie  nnilbcrry-Ieaf  io  be  made  ol'  ivory,  Lith  Ttf,  of  jade. 


Spontaneity. 


97 


The  things  between  Heaven  and  Earth  are  like  a  child  in  his 
mother's  womb.  After  ten  montbB  pregnancy  the  mother  gives 
birth  to  the  child.  Are  his  nose,  hh  mouth,  his  ears,  his  hair, 
his  eyes,  his  skin  with  down,  the  arteries,  the  fat,  the  bones,  the 
joints,  the  nails,  and  the  teeth  grown  of  themselves  in  the  womb, 
or  has  the  mother  made  them  ？ 

"Wliy  is  a  dummy  never  called  a  man?  Because  it  has  a  nose, 
a  mouth,  ears,  and  eyes,  but  not  a  spontaneous  nature.  Wu  Ti  was 
very  fond  of  his  consort  Wang.  Wlien  she  had  died,  he  pondered, 
whether  he  could  not  see  her  figure  again.  The  Taoists  made  an 
artificial  figure  of  the  lady.1  VV hen  it  was  ready,  it  passed  through 
the  palace  gate.  Wu  Ti  greatly  alarmed  rose  to  meet  her,  but,  all 
<»f  a  sudden,  she  was  not  seen  any  more.  Since  it  was  not  a  real, 
spontaneous  bein^,  but  a  semblance,  artificially  made  by  jugglers, 
it  became  diffuse  at  first  sight,  dispersed,  and  vanished.  Everything 
that  has  been  made  does  not  last  long,  like  tlie  image  of  tlie  em- 
press, which  appeared  only  for  a  short  while. 

The  Taoist  school  ai^ues  on  spontaneity,  but  it  does  not 
kno、v  how  to  substantiate  its  cause  by  evidence.  Therefore  tlieir 
theory  of  spontaneity  has  not  yet  l(mn(l  crtnlence.  However,  in 
spite  of  npontaneity  there  may  be  activity  for  a  while  in  support 
of  it.  Ploughing,  tilling,  weeding,  and  sowing  in  Spring  are  human 
actions.  Hut  as  soon  as  the  grain  lias  entered  the  soil,  it  begins 
growing  !>y  day  and  night.  Man  can  do  nothing  for  it,  or  if  he 
does,  lie  spoils  the  thing. 

A  man  of  Sung  was  sorry  that  his  sprouts  were  not  high 
enough,  therefore  he  pulled  them  out,  but,  on  the  following  day, 
they  were  dry,  and  died.  He  who  wishes  to  do  what  is  spon- 
taneous, is  on  a  par  with  this  man  <jf  Sung. 

The  following  question  may  be  raised  ： ― 44  Man  is  born  from 
Heaven  and  Karth.  Since  Heaven  and  Earth  are  inactive,  man 
who  has  received  the  fluid  of  Heaven,  ought  to  be  inactive  like- 
wise, wherefore  does  he  act  nevertlieless? " 

For  the  following  reason.  A  man  with  the  higliest,  purest, 
and  fullest  virtue  has  been  endowed  with  a  large  quantity  of  the 
lieavenlv  fluid,  therefore  lie  can  follow  the  example  of  Heaven, 
and  be  spontaneous  and  inactive  like  it.  He  who  lias  received 
hut  a  small  quota  of  the  fluid,  does  not  live  in  accordance  with 
righteousness  and  virtue,  and  does  not  resemble  Heaven  and  Karth. 


1  The  apparition  of  the  lady  was  evoked  by  the  court  magician  Shoo  Wrni/ 
in  121  b.c.    (Cf.  SM-cAi  chap.  28  p.  23.) 

Digitized  by  Google 


98  Lon-Heiig:  B.  Metaphysical. 

Tlence  he  is  called  unlike,  which  means  that  he  does  not  resemble 
Heaven  and  Earth.  Not  resembling  Heaven  and  Earth  he  cannot  be 
accounted  a  wise  man  or  a  sage.  Therefore  he  is  active. 

Heaven  and  Karth  are  the  furnace,  and  the  creating  is  the 
melting  process.  How  can  all  he  wise,  since  the  fluid  of  whidi 
they  are  formed  is  not  tlit*  same?  Huang  and  Lao  were  truly  wise. 
Huang  is  Huang  7Y，  and  Ltut  is  Lao  Tse.  Huang  and  Imo's  conduct 
was  such,  that  their  bodies  were  in  a  state  of  quietude  and  in- 
diirerence.  Their  government  consisted  in  inaction.  They  took  euro 
of  their  persons,  and  behaved  with  n'verence,  henre  Yin  and  Ynng 
were  in  harmony.  They  did  not  long  for  artitm,  ami  things  won* 
produced  of  themselves:  they  did  not  think  of  creating  anvtliing. 
and  thiugs  were  oomph'tod  spontaneously. 

The  Yi-king  says  that  liming  77,  V"",  and  S/nm  lot  tljcir  robes 
full,  and  tlie  empire  was  governed. 1  That  they  let  their, robes  fall 
means  that  their  r( 山 foil  down,  and  tliat  they  foldi'd  their  arms, 
doing  not  hi  no-.  ( on/ucitis  said,  ••  (iraiul  intleod  w  as  Yno  as  a  sove- 
reign ！  Heaven  aloiu*  is  great,  and  Yao  alone  emulated  it!"2  and, 
" How  imposing  w;is  the  way  in  ^  liich  S/iun  and  Yi)  swayed  the 
empire,  but  did  not  much  care  for  it."3  The  Duke  of  Clwu  makt^s 
(he  remark  that  the  supreme  ruler  enjoyed  his  ease.4  Hv  tlu> 
8ii pre ruler  <S'/'〃"  and  Yil  an*  meant.5 

Shun  and  Yil  took  over  the  peaceful  government,  which  tlu'v 
coutiuued,  appointing  wise  men  and  men  of  talent.  They  rfspefted 
themselves,  and  did  no  work  themselves,  and  the  onijnre  was  gov- 
erned. S/iun  and  Yil  received  tlie  pea»rful  government  from  Yao. 
yTao  imitated  Heaven :  he  did  n<it  do  meritorious  deeds  or  strive 
for  a  name,  and  ro  I  onus,  for  wliioh  notliinp;  was  done,  were  corii- 
jiletfd  of  themselves.  Henre  it  was  said,  "  Excellent  indeed,"  but 
the  jieople  did  not  tind  the  right  nnine  lor  it.  Those  aged  50  years 
、、- ore  beating  clods  of  earth  t outlier  on  their  land,  but  they  did 
not  understand  virtue,  because  (he  reforms  were  spontaneous. 

The  Yl-k'mg  says,  "  The  great  man  e(juals  Heaven  and  Karth 
in  virtu»'.'，"    Huang  Ti,  Yao,  and  Shun  were  sucli  great  men.  Their 


1   1'i-kHiff,  Chi-U'r  II  {Legged  transl.  p.  3S3). 
3  Analecta  VIII,  19. 
»  Analects  VIII，  18. 

•  Shu-km9,  To^hih,  Pt.V,  Bk.  XIV,  5  {Ltgge  Vol.  HI,  Pt.  II,  p.  455). 

5  All  oilier  loniimrutators  take  tlie  "  Mjprenie  ruler"  as  a  synonym  for  God, 
and  i  tliink  that  they  art'  ripht,  and  that  W'any  (  h'vui/'s  interpretation  is  ibrccd  for 
the  purpose  ot  supj>ortiiig  his  theory. 

" Cf.  ;».  12S. 


Digitized  by  Google 


—- 


-- 


Spontaneity.  99 

virtue  was  on  a  level  witli  that  of  Fleavcn  and  Earth,  therefore 
they  knew  inaction.  The  principle  of  Heaven  is  inaction.  Ac- 
cordingly in  spring  it  does  not  do  the  germinating,  in  summrr 
the  growing,  in  autumn  the  ripening,  or  in  winter  the  hiding  of 
the  seeds.  When  tlie  Yang  fluid  comes  forth  spontaneously,  plants 
、vill  germinate  ami  grow  of  themselves,  and,  when  the  Yin  fluid 
rises,  they  ripen  and  disappear  of  their  own  accord. 

When  we  irrigate  garden  land  with  water  drawn  from  wells 
or  <lrainetl  from  ponds,  plants  germinate  and  grow  also,  but,  wlien 
showers  of  rain  come  down,  the  stalks,  leaves,  and  roots  are 
all  abundant ly  soalird.  Xatural  moisture  is  much  more  copious 
than  artificial  irrigation  from  wells  and  ponds.  Thus  inactive  action 
brings  the  greatest  results.  By  not  seeking  it,  merit  is  acquired, 
and  by  not  afFet'ting  it,  fame  is  obtained.  Hain-sliowci-s,  merit,  and 
fame  are  something  great,  yet  Heaven  and  Earth  do  not  work  for 
them.   Wlien  tlie  fluid  harmonises,  rain  gathers  spontaneously. 

The  literati  in  speaking  of  the  relation  of  husband  and  wife 
establish  similarities  with  Heaven  and  arfli.  For  husband  and 
wife  they  find  similarities  with  Heaven  and  Earth,  but  in  so  far 
as  they  are  unable  to  make  use  of  the  relation  of  husband  and 
wife,  when  discussing  the  nature  of  Heaven  and  Earth,  they  show 
a  regrettable  lack  of  acumen. 

Heaven  expnnck  above,  and  Earth  below.  When  the  fluid 
from  brlow  rises,  atid  tlie  fluid  on  liigli  descends,  all  things  are 
created  in  tlie  middle.  While  they  art'  growing,  it  is  not  necessary 
that  Heaven  shoulrl  still  care  for  them,  just  as  the  father  does  not 
know  the  embryo,  after  it  is  in  the  mother's  womb.  Things  grow- 
spontaneously,  and  the  child  is  formed  of  itself.  Heaven  and  Earth, 
and  father  and  mother  can  take  no  further  cognisance  of  it.  But 
after  birth,  the  way  of  man  is  instruction  and  teaching,  tlie  way 
of  Heaven,  inaction  and  yielding  to  nature.  Therefore  Heaven  al- 
lows the  fish  to  swim  in  the  rivers,  and  the  wild  beasts  to  roam 
in  the  mountains,  following  their  natural  propensities.  It  does 
not  drive  the  fish  up  tlie  hills,  or  the  wild  boasts  into  the  water. 
Why?  Because  that  would  be  an  outrage  upon  their  nature,  and 
a  complete  disregard  of  what  suits  them.  The  people  resemble 
tish  and  beasts.  High  virtue  governs  them  as  easily,  as  one  fries 
small  fisli,  and  as  Heaven  and  Earth  would  art. 

Shftng  Yang 1  changed  the  la、vs  of  Ch  in  wisliing  to  acquire 
extraordinary  merit.    He  did  not  hear  tlie  advice  of  Chao  Liang, 


' Cf.  p.  171  Note  2. 


Digitized  by  Google 


100 


Lai»-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


consequently  he  incurred  the  horrible  penalty  of  being  torn  asunder 
by  carts.  If  the  virtue  be  poor,  and  the  desires  many,  prince  and 
minister  hate  one  another.  The  Taoists  possess  real  virtue  ： 一 the 
inferiors  a^ree  with  the  superiors,  aud  the  superiors  are  at  peace 
with  their  inferiors.  Being  genuinely  ignorant,  they  do  nothing, 
-  and  there  is  no  reason,  why  they  should  be  reproved.  This  is  what 
they  call  a  well  balanced  govemmeut.  Prince  and  minister  forget  one 
another  in  governing,  the  fish  forget  each  other  in  the  water,1  and 
so  do  the  beasts  ia  the  forests,  and  men  in  life.   That  is  Heaven. 

Confucius  said  to  Yen  Yuan,  "  When  I  deferred  to  you,  I  did 
not  think  of  it,  and  when  you  deferred  to  me,  you  likewise  did 
not  think  of  it." 2  Although  Confucius  was  like  a  prince,  and  Yen 
Yuan  like  a  minister,  he  could  not  make  up  his  mind  to  reprimand 
Yen  Yuan,  how  mucli  less  would  Lao  Tse  have  been  able  to  do  so, 
if  、ve  consider  liim  as  a  prince  and  UVn  Tse 9  as  his  minister?  Lao 
Tse  and  Win  Tse  were  like  Heaven  and  Karth. 

Generous  wine  tastes  sweet.  When  those  who  drink  it,  be- 
come drunk,  they  <1»  not  know  each  other.  Bad  wine  is  sour  and 
bitter.  Hosts  and  guests  knit  the  br" 、、- s.  Now,  reprimands  are  a 
proof  of  the  badness  of  one's  principles.4  To  say  that  Heaven  roj)- 
ritnands  would  bo  like  pretending  that  Heaven's  excellence  is  in- 
ferior to  that  of  generous  wine. 

Ceremonies  originate  from  a  want  of  loyalty  and  good  faith, 
and  are  the  beginning  of  confusion.5  On  that  score  people  find 
fault  with  one  another,  which  leads  to  reproof.  At  the  time  of 
the  Three  Rulers  people  were  sitting  down  self-satisfied,  and  walk- 
ing about  at  perfect  ease.  Sometimes  tliey  took  themselves  for 
horses,  aud  sometimes  for  oxen.  Virtuous  actions  were  out  of  the 
question,  and  the  people  were  dull  and  beclouded.  Knowledge 
and  wisdom  did  not  yet  make  their  appearance.  Originally,  there 
happened  no  calamities  or  catastrophes  either,  or,  if  they  did,  they 
wero  not  denoted  as  rfjirimauds.  Why  ?  Because  at  that  time  people 
were  feeble-minded,  and  did  not  restrain  or  reproach  one  another. 


1  "  The  fish  forget  each  other  in  the  rivers  aitd  lakes,"  says  Huai  Aan 
T«e  II,  4r. 

， Both  were  in  a  stat«  of  blissful  forgot  fulness  and  puqioselossness.  The 
passage  is  quoted  from  Huai  i\'an  TV  XI.  ")r. 

1  A  Taoist  philosopher,  disciple  of  Lao  7V. 

*  Reprimands  tell  against  the  system  by  which  tlicy  are  required,  periVn  t 
virtue  pervading  ihe  universe  necessitates  no  recriminations,  for  all  are  filled  with  it 
as  with  geueroiu  wine. 

5  Tl"、  argtunent  is  quite  Taoist. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spontaneity. 


101 


Later  generations  liave  gradually  declined:— superiors  and  inferiors 
recriminate,  and  calamitous  events  continually  liappen.  Hence  the 
hypothesis  of  reprimands  has  been  developed.  The  Heaven  of  to- 
day is  the  Heaven  of  old,  and  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  Heaven 
of  old  was  benign,  whereas  uow  Heaven  is  harsh.  Tlie  liypothesis 
of  reprimands  has  been  put  forward  at  present,  as  a  surmise  made 
by  men  from  their  own  feelings. 

Declarations  and  oaths  do  not  reach  up  to  the  Five  Em- 
perors, agreements  and  covenants  to  the  Three  Rulers,  and  the 
giving  of  hostages  to  the  Five  Princes. 1  The  more  people's  virtue 
declined,  the  more  faith  began  to  fail  them.  In  their  guile  aud 
treachery  they  broke  treaties,  and  were  deaf  to  admonitions.  Treaties 
and  admonitions  being  of  no  avail,  tliey  reproached  one  another, 
and  if  no  change  was  brought  about  by  these  reproaches,  they 
took  up  arms,  and  fought,  till  one  was  exterminated.  Consequeutly 
reprimands  point  to  a  state  of  decay  and  disorder.  Therefore  it 
appears  very  dubious  that  Heaven  should  m<iko  reprimands. 

Those  who  believe  in  reprimands,  refer  to  human  ways  as  a 
proof.  Among  men  a  sovereign  reprimands  liis  minister,  and  high 
Heaven  reprimands  the  sovereign.  It  does  so  by  means  of  cal- 
amitous events,  they  say.  However,  among  men  it  also  happens 
that  the  minister  reraoustrates  with  】iis  sovereign.  When  Heaven 
reprimands  an  emperor  by  visiting  him  witli  calamities,  and  the 
latter  wishes  at  that  time  to  remonstrate  with  high  Heaven,  how 
can  lie  do  it?  If  they  say  that  Heaven's  virtue  is  no  perfect,  that 
man  cannot  remonstrate  with  it.  then  Heaven  possessed  of  such 
virtue,  ought  likewise  to  keep  quiet,  and  ought  not  to  reprimand. 
When  the  sovereign  of  Wan  S/iih  did  wrong,  the  latter  did  not 
say  a  word,  but  at  table  he  <lid  not  eat,  which  showed  his  per- 
fection. An  excellent  man  can  remain  silent,  and  august  Heaven 
with  his  sublime  virtue  should  reprimand?  Heaven  does  not  act, 
therefore  it  does  not  speak.  The  disasters,  which  so  frequently 
occur,  are  the  work  of  the  spontaneous  fluid. 

Heaven  and  Earth  cannot  act,  nor  do  tliey  possess  any  know- 
ledge. When  there  is  a  cold  in  the  stomach,  it  aches.  This  is 
not  caused  by  man,  but  the  spontaneous  working  of  the  fluid.  The 
space  between  Heaven  and  Earth  is  like  that  between  the  back 
and  the  stomach.2 

1  The  five  leading  feudal  princes  during  the  later  Chou  epoch,  to  wit:— Duke 
Hvan  of  C'h  'i  D.B.C.  643,  Duke  W  f'-n  of  Chin  D.u.c.  62b,  Duke  Hniang  of  Sung  D.b.c. 
King  L'h 赚 g  of  Ch'u  D.b.c.  591,  and  Duke  Mu  of  Ch'in  D.b.c.  621. 

2  And  it  U  likewise  filled  with  the  spontaneous  fluid. 


Digitized  by  Google 


102  Lun-Hnig:  B.  Metaphysiral. 

If  Heaven  is  regarded  as  tlie  author  of  every  calamity,  are 
all  ubnormities,  great  and  small,  complicated  and  simple,  caused  by 
Heaven  also?  A  cow  may  give  birth  to  a  horse,  and  on  a  clierry- 
tree  a  plum  may  grow.  Does,  according  to  the  theory  under  dis- 
cussion, the  spirit  of  Heaven  enter  the  belly  of  the  cow  to  create 
the  horse,  or  stick  a  plum  upon  a  cherry-tree? 

Lno  1  said,  "  The  Master  said,"  "  Having  no  official  employment, 
I  acquired  many  arts,"  and  he  said,  "  When  I  was  young,  my 
condition  was  low ,  and  tlieivlorc  I  ai^juired  my  ability  in  many 
things,  but  tliey  wvrv  mean  matters."2  What  is  low  in  peopl**, 
such  as  ability  and  ski) fulness,  is  not  practised  by  the  great  ones. 
IIo、v  could  Heaven,  \\hicli  is  so  majestic  and  sublime,  choose  to 
bring  about  catastrophes  with  a  view  to  ivprimanding  people ？ 

Moreover,  auspicious  and  inauspicious  events  are  like  th«' 
ilushed  colour  appearing  on  the  face.  Man  cannot  produce  it,  the 
colour  comes  out  of  itself.  Heaven  and  Karth  are  like  the  human 
body,  the  transformation  of  their  (luid,  like  the  fluslied  colour. 
How  can  Heaven  and  Earth  cause  the  sudden  change  of  their  fluid, 
since  man  cauuot  pr«>dure  the  (Colour?    The  change  of  tl"、 

fluid  is  spontaneous,  it  appears  of  itsflf,  as  tlio  colour  comes  out 
of  iteoli".  The  soothsayers  rely  on  this,  wheu  they  foretell  the 
future. 

Heat  and  <*old,  repriniamls,  pheuonienal  changes,  and  attraction, 
all  these  four  errora  have  alr«*adv  b«*«Mi  tre.-itwl.3  Reprimands  arc 
more  contrary  to  the  ways  of  Heaven  than  anytliing  else,  there- 
fore I  have  discussed  them  twice,  explaining  w  lie  re  the  difficulties 
in  tlie  way  oi"  the  two  antagonistic  views  lie.  The  one  is  in  ac- 
cordance witli  human  affairs,  but  does  not  la  1 1  in  with  Taoism, 
the  other  agre«'s  with  Taoism,  but  is  not  iu  hannony  with  hunuut 
afl'airs.  But  thou»li  opposed  to  the  belief  of  tlie  (  oiifucianists,  it 
correspouds  to  the  ideas  of  llwtny  Ti  and  Lao  Tst: 

1  f'ft  in  ('hanff,  styled  T»e  K'ui,  a  disciple  of  (  on/uchit. 

2  Analects  IX, 

， In  the  preceding  chapters  oi'  tiie  Lun-hvntf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Nature  of  Tilings.  103 


CHAPTER  IV. 
The  Nature  of  Things  、Wu-shih、. 

The  literati  declare  that  Heaveu  and  Earth  produw  man  on 
purpose.  This  assertion  is  preposterous,  for,  when  1 1  eaven  and 
Karth  mix  up  their  fluids,  man  is  born  as  a  matter  of  course  uu- 
intentionally.  In  just  the  same  manner  a  clulcl  is  produced  spon- 
taneously, when  the  essences  of  husband  and  wile  are  harmoniously 
blended.  At  the  time  uf  su<-h  an  inten-ourso,  the  cquple  does  not 
intend  to  beget  a  child.  Their  passionate  love  being  roused,  they 
unite,  and  out  of  this  union  a  child  is  born.  From  the  fact  that 
husband  and  wife  do  not  purposely  beget  u  child  one  may  infer 
that  Heaven  and  Earth  do  not  products  man  on  purpose  either. 

However,  man  is  produced  by  Heaven  and  Earth  just  aw  fisb 
in  a  pond,  or  lice  on  man.  They  grow  in  response  to  a  peculiar 
l'orce.  each  species  re[)roduc:ing  itself.  Tliis  holds  good  for  all  the 
things  which  come  iutu  being  between  II«'aveu  and  Earth. 

It  is  said  in  books  that  Heaven  and  Earth  do  not  create  man 
<»n  purpose,  but  that  man  is  pr<Kluced  unintentionally,  as  a  matter 
of  course.  If  anybody  liolds  tliis  view,  how  ran  lie  admit  that 
Heaveu  and  Earth  are  the  l'umace,  all  tilings  created,  th<-  copper, 
the  Yin  and  the  Ywkj,  the  fire,  ami  all  the  transformations,  the  work- 
ing? If  the  potter  and  the  foundtT  use  fire  in  order  to  melt  the 
nipper,  and  to  bum  their  ware,  their  doings  are  di»;tatetl  by  a  certain 
purpose.  Now,  tliey  own  thur  Heaven  and  Earth  create  man  without 
a  purpose,  tliat,  under  given  oircuinstancoi>,  he  grows  spontaneously. 
Can  it  be  said  of  the  potter  and  founder,  that  tliey  too  make  their 
ware  purposeless,  and  tliat  it  grows  naturally,  and  ot*  its  own  accord  ？ 

If  a  comparison  is  not  to  the  point,  it  cannot  be  called  an 
analogy,  and  H'  words  do  not  express  the  truth,  the  statement  can- 
not be  considered  correct.  It  may  be  urged  that  the  purport  of 
tlie  above  simile  is  but  U>  show  that  the  】ieavwily  fluid,  witli  which 
man  is  imbued,  is  not  quit,'  uniform,  as  the  moulds  into  whicli  the 
liquid  coppov  runs,  and  the  fire  apj)lit*cl  in  burning  earthenware, 
may  be  ditrerent,  and  that  it  is  not  said  that  Heaven  and  Eartli 
create  man  in  the  same  way  as  potters  and  founders  do  their 
business. 


Digitized  by  Google 


104 


Lun-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


Whenever  human  affairs  are  referre<l  to,  to  explain  human 
nature,  tliey  must  be  taken  as  a  whole,  which  cannot  be  divided 
into  diU'erent  parts.  Wlien  the  eye  tries  to  have  a  look  at  its 
own  head,  the  head  will  turn,  and  wlien  the  hand  grasps  at  the 
foot,  the  foot  will  move.  Eye  and  head  belong;  to  tin*  same  oi^an- 
i3Qi,  hand  and  foot  to  the  same  body.' 

The  potter  and  founder  liaving  first  prepared  the  clay  for 
the  vessel,  require  a  mould  to  form  it,  which  is  a  designed  act. 
Burning  coal  in  order  to  have  a  fire,  they  regulate  the  furnace  or 
stove,  which  is  done  on  purpose  also.  Yet  not  all  the  molten 
copper  gets  a  proper  shape,  and  tlie  burned  vessels  do  not  invariably 
turn  out  well,  for  their  completion  is  not  a  designed  act.2 

Since  Heaven  aud  Earth  cannot  create  man  on  purpose,  the 
creation  of  all  the  other  things  and  beings  cannot  be  intentional 
either.  The  fluids  of  Heaven  and  Earth  mixing,  things  grow  natur- 
ally and  spontaneously. 

Tilling,  weeding  the  ground,  and  sowing  are  designed  acts, 
but  whether  the  seed  grows  up.  and  ripeas,  or  not,  depends  on 
chance,  and  spontaneous  action.  How  do  we  know?  If  Heaven  had 
produced  its  creatures  on  purpose,  it  ought  to  have  tauglit  them 
to  love  each  other,  and  not  to  prey  upon  aud  destroy  one  another. 
One  might  object  that  such  is  tlie  nature  of  the  Five  Elements,  tliat 
wlien  Hoavtm  <;reatCH  all  things,  it  imbues  tlie.ni  with  the  fluids 
of  the  Fi vf  Klements,3  and  that  thesf  light  together,  and  destroy 
one  anotli«*r.  Hut  then  Heaven  ought  lo  have  filled  its  creatures 
with  tlie  fluid  of  one  element  only,  and  tauglit  them  mutual  love, 
not  permitting  the  fluids  of  the  five  elements  to  resort  to  strife  aud 
mutual  destruction. 

People  will  n*joiu,  that  wishing  to  use  things,  one  must  cause 
them  to  fight  and  destroy  cacli  other,  hecjiuse  thereby  only  van 
they  be  inaile  into  what  tlicy  are  intended  to  be.  Therefore  tliey 

1  The  meaning  is  that,  if  the  creation  of  man  by  Heaven  and  Earth  be  com- 
pared to  the  melting  of  copper  or  the  buniing  of  carlhciiware,  these  latt«r  processes 
must  be  takun  in  their  entirety  like  a  body  or  au  organism.  Touching  one  member, 
one  afTecU  tlie  wliole  organism.  One  cannot  single  out  some  constituent  parts  of 
the  process,  such  as  the  moulding  or  the  firing.  Then  "  purpose  •'  is  conipmed  in 
the  image,  wliich  thereby  becomes  distorted. 

2  The  completion  of  a  work  done  by  tnnn  on  purpose,  depends  on  conditions 
and  circumstances  over  which  he  has  not  always  control.  Man  acts  with  a  purpose, 
but  the  forces  of  nature  whicli  he  sets  in  motion,  and  which  bring  about  the  final 
result,  have  no  purpose. 

， The  Five  Elements  of  Chinese  natural  philosophy :— metal,  wood,  water, 
fire,  aiid  earth. 


— 1 


The  Nature  of  Things. 


105 


say,  Heaven  uses  the  fluids  of  the  Five  Elements  in  producing  all 
tliiugs,  and  man  uses  all  these  things  in  performing  his  many  works. 
If  one  thiug  does  not  subdue  the  other,  they  cannot  be  employed 
together,  and,  without  mutual  struggle  aud  annihilation,  they  cannot 
be  made  use  of.  If  the  metal  does  not  hurt  the  wood,  the  wood 
cannot  be  used,  aud  if  the  fire  does  not  melt  the  metal,  the  metal 
cannot  be  made  into  a  tool.  Thus  the  injury  done  by  one  tiling 
to  the  other  turus  out  to  he  a  benefit  after  all.  If  all  the  living 
creatures  overpower,  b'\tt\  and  devour  one  another,  it  is  the  lluida 
of  the  Five  Elements  also  that  compel  tlieua  to  do  so. 

Ergo  wc  are  to  understand  tliat  all  created  tilings  must  injure 
one  another,  if  they  are  to  be  useful.  Now  tigers,  wolves,  serpents, 
snakes,  wasps,  ami  scorpions  attack  and  hurt  man.  Did  then  Heaven 
design  man  to  be  made  use  of  by  those  animals? 

Furthermore,  because  the  human  body  harbours  the  fluids  of 
the  Five  Elements,  man  practises  the  Five  Virtues,  which  are  the 
outcome  of  the  Five  Elements.  As  long  as  he  lias  the  Five  Organs 
in  his  bosom,  those  fluids  are  in  order.  If,  according  to  this  view, 
animala  prey  upon  and  destroy  one  another,  be (； ause  o(  their  being 
endued  with  the  fluids  of  the  Five  Elements,  the  human  body  with 
the  Five  Organs  in  its  breast  ought  to  b<，  a  victim  of  internecine 
•  strife,  and  the  heart  of  a  man  living  a  righteous  life  be  lacerated 
by  discord.  But  what  proves  us  that  there  is  really  an  antagonism 
of  the  Five  Elements,  and  that  therefore  animals  oppress  each  other? 

Tlie  sign  Yin  corresponds  to  wood,  its  proper  animal  is  the 
tiger.1  HsQ  corresponds  to  earth,  its  animal  is  the  dog.  Ch  ou  and 
Wei  correspond  to  earth  likewise,  Ch  ou  having  as  animal  the  ox, 
and  Wei  having  the  sheep.  Wood  overcomes  earth,  therefore  the 
clog,  the  ox,  and  the  sheep  are  overpowered  by  the  tiger.  Hai  goes 
with  water,  ite  animal  being  the  boar.  Sse  goes  with  fire,  and  has 
the  serpent  as  animal.  Tse  means  also  water,  its  animal  being  the 
rat.  Mm  also  corresponds  to  tire,  its  animal  is  the  horse.  Water 
overcomes  fire,  therefore  the  hoar  devours  the  serpent.  Fire  is 
quenched  by  water,  therefore,  when  the  horse  cats  the  excrements 
of  rats,  its  belly  swells  up.a 


1  In  the  ancient,  »o  called  natural  philosophy  of  the  Chinese,  a  cyclical  char- 
such  as  Hm,  ( 'Htm,  Wei,  etc.,  and  a  certain  animul  are  supposed  to  correspond 
to  each  of  the  five  elements.  From  Uic  relations  between  the  elements  one  has  drawn 
conclusions  conceniing  tlicir  attributes.  The  greatest  Cliinese  scholars  have  indulged 
in  these  plays,  aud  mistaken  Uiem  for  natural  science. 

1  To  wit  the  horse  is  hurt  by  the  rat,  because  fire,  the  element  of  the  horse, 
is  quenched  by  water,  whicli  correspond*  to  tiio  rat. 


Digitized  by  Google 


1"H 


Lmi-H«'iig:  B.  Metaphysical. 


However,  goin^  more  thoroughly  into  the  question,  we  are 
cou fronted  with  the  fact  that  uot  unfrequently  it  does  not  appear 
that  animals  overpower  one  another,  which  they  ought,  after  this 
theory.  Wu  is  connected  with  the  horse,  Tse  with  the  rat,  Yu  with 
tliu  cock,  aud  Mao  with  tlie  hare.  Water  is  stronger  than  fire, 
why  does  the  rat  not  drive  away  the  horse?  Metal  is  stronger 
tlian  wood,  why  does  the  cock  not  eat  the  hare?  llai  means  the 
boar,  Wei  the  sheep,  and  ( 7<  on  tlie  ox.  Eartli  overcomes  water, 
wlierefore  do  tlie  ox  and  the  sheep  not  kill  the  boar.  Sse  corres- 
ponds to  tlie  serpent,  S/it'n  to  the  monkey.  Fire  destroys  metal,  how 
is  it  tliat  the  serpent  does  not  cat  the  monkey?  The  monkey  is 
afraid  of  the  rat,  and  the  dog  bites  the  monkey.  The  rat  goes 
with  water,  ami  the  monkey  with  metal.  Water  not  being  stronger 
tli an  metal,  wliy  does  tlie  monkey  tear  the  rat?  I Isii  is  allied  to 
earth,  S/ien  to  tlie  monkey.  Earth  not  forcing  metal,  for  what 
reason  is  tlie  monkey  frightened  by  the  dog? 

The  E:ist  is  represented  l>y  wood,  its  constellation  is  the  Blue 
Dragon,1  the  West  l>y  metal,  its  constellation  is  the  White  Tiger. 
Tlie  South  corresponds  to  fire,  and  has  as  constellation  the  Scarlet 
Bird,  the  North  is  connected  with  water,  its  constellation  is  the 
Black  Tortoise.2  Heaven  by  emitting  the  essence  of  these  four  stars 
produces  the  bodies  of  tlicse  four  animals  on  earth.3  Of  all  the 
animals  they  art'  tlie  lirst,  and  th«*y  are  imbued  with  the  fluids  oi' 
th<*  Five  Elem<uits  in  the  highest  degreo.  No、v，  when  the  dragon 
ami  the  tiger  mo«'t,  they  do  not  fight,  and  the  scarlet  bird  and 
tlio  tortoise  do  ea<'h  other  no  harm.  Starting  from  these  four  famous 
animals,  and  from  t  liosc  belonging  tothetwolve  horary  characters,*  wc 
tind  that  all  the  other  animals  endued  with  the  Five  Elements,  can  much 
less  be  prompted  to  strife  and  discord  by  their  natural  organisation. 

As  all  eroatfd  things  struggle  and  tight  together,  the  animals 
subdue  one  another.    When  they  try  to  tear  their  enemies  to  pieces, 


1  The  points  of  the  compass,  the  stars,  hours,  days,  months,  and  years,  colours, 
grains,  etc.  hav«  all  heen  iiirorporated  into  the  afore-nientioned  scheme,  based  on 
tlie  interaction  ol'  the  elements. 

- These  Four  ('onstellations  are  the  Four  Quadrants  into  wJiich  tlie  Twenty- 
eight  Stellar  Mansions  are  divided.    (Cf.  Mayers  Manual,  Pt.  II,  N.  UI  and  313.) 

:t  Tli 續 four  constellations  arc  stars,  but  not  animals,  tliougli  they  bear  tiiu 
iiame.s      animals.    How  thou  could  Heaven  produce  animals  from  tlieir  essence? 

4  The  Twelve  Horary  ('haractcrs  are  tlte  Twelve  Brandies  or  Twelve  Cyc- 
lical Signs  a|i|)lied  to  the  twehft  double  liours  of  the  day.  They  as  well  as  their 
corresponding  animals  have  been  enumerated  above,  tliougli  not  in  their  regular 
sequence,  'ilie  Twelve  Animals  are:— Kat,  ox,  tiger,  hare,  dragon,  serpent,  horse, 
slieep,  monkey,  cock,  dog,  boar.    (Vid.  Giles,  Diet.  p.  13b3.) 


The  Nature  <»f  Things. 


107 


and  devour  them,  all  <lepends  ou  the  sliarpncsa  ol  their  teeth,  the 
strength  of  their  muscles  and  sinews,  the  agility  of  their  movements, 
and  their  courage. 

If  with  men  on  earth  the  power  is  not  equally  divided,  or 
their  strength  equally  balanced,  tlicy  vanquish  and  subjugate  one 
another  as  a  matter  of  course,  using  their  strength  to  subdue,  and 
their  swords  to  despatcli  their  foes.  Man  strikes  with  his  swonl 
just  as  the  beasts  butt,  bite,  and  scratch  with  their  horns,  teeth, 
and  rlaws.  A  stroug  arm,  pointed  horns,  a  truculent  courage, 
and  long  teeth  win  the  victory.  Pusillanimity,  short  claws,  cow- 
ardice, and  blunted  spurs  bring  about  defeat. 

Men  are  audacious  or  faint-hearted.  That  is  the  reason  why 
they  win  or  lose  their  battles.  The  victors  are  therefore  not  neces- 
sarily entlowed  with  the  fluid  ol*  metal,  or  the  vanquished  with 
*he  essence  of  wood.1 

Omfuciws  afraid  of  Yang  //"•-'  took  himself  olF,  covered  with 
perspiration.  Yang  Hu\s  colour  \v;i.s  not  necessarily  white,  aud 
J'm-""  was  not  bhu»-facc<l.3  Because  the  ialeon  pounces  upon  pi- 
geons and  sparrows,  and  liec^ausc  the  liawk-owl  kills,  and  devours 
wilil  geese,  it  does  not  lollow  that  the  falcon  and  the  hawk-owl 
are  born  in  the  south,  or  that  pigf()ns,  sparrows,  and  wild  geese 
inhabit  the  west.'  It  is  but  bodily  strength  and  courage  that  lead 
to  victory. 

In  the  mansion  tlu'rc  will  always  he  people  disputing,  unci  in 
tlie  cottage,  litii;atiii^.  In  a  luw-suit  there  must  be  right  and 
wrong,  in  a  discussion  truth  and  error.  He  who  is  ia  error, 
and  in  tlic  wrong,  loses,  wlierejis  he  who  tells  the  truth,  and  is 
right,  wins. 

It  may  happeu,  however,  tliat  in  arguing,  the  glib-tongutMl, 
whose  speech  flows  with  flippant  rapidity,  win,  and  that  tlu;  in- 
elt)quent,  who  falter  and  stammer  in  their  speech,  arc  beaten.  Tlie 
tongue  plays  tlie  same  roll  in  < I e hates  as  swords  and  halberds  in 
battles.  Sharp  swords,  long  liallx'nls,  st nmg  and  quick  hands  <md 
feet  secure  the  victory.  Hluiit  swords,  short  spears,  and  slow  hauds 
and  feet  cause  the  defeat. 


1  Metal  is  stronger  than  wood,  as  we  were  told  above. 

1  i'anff  llu  was  tlie  principal  minister  of  tlie  (  hi  family,  one  of  the  three 
leading  families  in  tlie  Lit  State,  ('on/ncii^'  country.  Yany  Ihi  being  an  usurper, 
scheming  to  arrogate  tlie  wliolo  nutliority  oi'  Uie  Lu  State  to  iiiinscli',  <  'onfuciuJt 
refused  to  see  him.  ((；!'.  AiuilecU  XVII，  1.) 

， Wliite  overcomes  blue. 

•  Because  the  soulli  U  »ui>i)o»cd  to  l»e  stronger  tliun  tlie  west. 


Digitized  by  Google 


108 


Liin-H«'ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


Whether  one  creature  vanquishes  the  other,  depends  on  its 
bodily  strength,  or  its  prowess,  or  its  dexterity.  If  a  small  being  is 
courageous,  and  possesses  a  quick  tongue  and  nimble  feet,  a  small 
animal  may  overpower  a  big  one,  and  a  big  one  without  bodily 
strength  and  destitute  of  powerful  horns  or  wings,  may  succumb 
to  a  small  antagonist  despite  its  bigness.  The  magpie  eats  the  skin 
of  the  hedgehog,  and  the  shrike  swallows  the  snake,  for  the  hedge- 
hog and  the  snake  are  not  very  nimble.  Gnats  and  mosquitoes  are 
not  as  strong  as  the  ox  or  the  horse,  yet  these  latter  are  tonnented 
by  gnats  and  mosquitoes,  wliifh  are  a  very  audacious  lot. 

The  horns  of  a  stag  are  strong  enough  to  pierce  a  dog,  and 
a  monkey  might  well  catcli  a  rat  with  its  hands,  but  the  stag  is 
brought  to  bay  l>y  tlu*  dog,  and  the  monkey  driven  away  by  a 
rat,  for  they  (l'，  not  know  how  to  make  use  of  their  horns  and 
claws.  Thus  an  ox,  ten  years  old,  is  lead  by  a  lierdsboy,  and  aa 
elephant,  eii>;lit  cubits  higli,  obeys  the  hook  of  a  young  Annamese 
mahout,  all  for  want  of  skill.  With  cleverness  a  small  creature 
gets  the  better  of  a  big  one,  but  without  it  the  weak  succumbs 
to  the  strong. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Pheiiunienal  Changes. 


101) 


CHAPTER  V. 
Phenomenal  Changes  (Pien  t'ung). 

Arguing  on  calamitous  events  I  have  already  expressed  my 
cloubts  as  to  Heaven  reprimanding  man  by  misfortunes.1  They 
say,  moreover,  that  tlie  sovereign,  as  it  were,  moves  Heaven  by 
his  government,  and  that  Heaven  moves  tho  fluid  in  response. 
Beating  a  drum  and  striking  a  bell  witli  a  hammer  would  he  an 
analogous  process.  The  drum  represents  Heaven,  the  hammer  the 
government,  and  the  sound  of  the  drum  or  tlie  bell  is  like  Heaven's 
response.  When  man  acts  below,  the  heavenly  fluid  survenes,  uud 
accompanies  his  actions.    I  confess  that  I  doubt  this  also. 

Heaven  can  move  things,  but  how  can  things  move  Heaven? 
Men  and  things  depend  upon  Heaven,  and  Heaven  is  the  master 
of  men  and  things.  Thus  one  says  that,  when  Wang  Liwig 2  whips 
the  horses,  the  carriage  and  the  steeds  rush  over  tlio  plain.  It  is 
not  said  that,  when  the  carriage  and  the  steeds  chase  over  tlie 
plain,  Wang  Liany  subsequently  whips  the  horses  The  heavenly 
fluid  clianges  above,  and  men  and  things  respond  to  it  below. 
Consequently,  when  Heaven  is  about  to  rain,  the  slutug-ijnny 3  begins 
to  dance,  and  attracts  llie  rain.  The  " tJiang-ynny"  is  a  creature 
which  knows  the  rain.  As  soon  as  Heaven  is  about  to  rain,  it 
bencU  its  single  leg,  and  commences  to  dance. 

When  Heaven  is  going  to  rain,  the  mole-crickets  and  ants 
leave  their  abodes,  the  eartli-worins  come  forth,  the  chords  of 
guitars  become  loose,  and  chronic  diseases  more  violent.  This 
shows,  how  Heaven  moves  tliintrs.  When  Heaven  is  about  to  blow, - 
the  creatures  living  in  nests  become  restless,  and,  when  it  is  going 
to  rain,  the  insects  staying  in  holes  become  excited.  The  fluid  of 
wind  and  rain  has  such  an  ein-ct  upon  tlioso  creatures.  Man  takes 
the  same  position  between  Heaven  and  Kartli  as  fleas  and  bujjs 
between  the  upper  and  lower  garments,  or  crickets  and  ants  in 
crevices.    Can  (leas  and  bugs,  crickets  and  ants,  in  so  far  as  they 

1  In  chap.  VI，  which  in  the  Lun-hrng  precedes  chap.  V. 

1  A  famous  charioteer  (cf.  p.  138). 

i  A  one-legged  bird  said  to  portend  rain. 


Digitized  by  Google 


110 


Lun-Hrnp:   B.  Mrtaphysiral. 


are  cither  rebellious  or  peaceful,  wild  or  quiet.  1'ring  about  a  chansje 
of  llit'  iluid  hi  the  crevices?  Fh'as  and  hugs,  inole-crirkets  and 
ant*  canin)r  do  this.  To  prct«'ii(l  tliat  in  an  is  a  bid  to  do  so,  shows 
a  inisi'niK'option  of  the  naturo  of  tlip  fluid  of  tilings. 

W lie ii  the  wind  comes,  the  boujjlis  of  the  trees  shako,  hut 
those  boughs  cannot  product*  tlie  wind.  In  the  same  manner  at 
tlie  einl  of  suninicr  tlie  fielil  crickets  chirrup,  and  the  cicadas  cry. 
They  an*  afl'ei'tcd  by  the  Yin  Huid.  Wlien  tlie  thunder  rolls,  the 
plieasants  become  fri^hteiu'd,  ami,  when  the  inserts  awake  from 
t lieir  state  of  torpi<lity,  the  snakes  conn'  forth.  J  liis  is  the  rising 
of  the  Yang  lhii<l.  Wl""i  it  is  near  mid-night,  the  cranes  scream, 
and  when  ar  dawn  tlu*  sun  is  about  to  rise,  the  cocks  orow. 
Altliougli  tln'sc  be  not  pl""iotm"ial  <*lian^es,  tbt»y  show  at  least, 
how  tl"，  hoavenly  fluid  moves  tilings,  and  liow  those  respond  to 
the  heavenly  (luid.  One  may  sav  that  heat  and  cold  influemu*  the 
sovi*rei^n  in  such  a  way,  that  lie  emits  a  tluid  by  wliicli  he  rewards 
or  punislies,  hut  arc  we  warran(t*d  in  saying  that  rewards  and 
ptinislinuMtts  affect  high  Heaven  so,  that  it  causes  heat  or  cold 
to  respond  to  the  government':' 

In  rofjard  to  the  Six  Passions 1  the  expositors  of  the  \v\m\ 
tlit'ory  maintain  tli.it,  when  the  wind  blows,  robbers  and  tiiieves 
set  to  work  mi 山' r  its  influcnco,  but  the  nature  of  robbers  and 
thieves  cannot  move  Heaven  to  send  the  、vin<l.  When  the  wind 
blows,  it  lui8  a  strange  influence  on  perverted  minds  so.  tl>at  robbers 
an<l  thieves  do  their  dveAs.  How  can  we  prove  tliat?  Robbers 
and  thieves  seeing  sompflnn^,  take  it  away,  and  beholding  an 
enemy,  kill  iiim.  J'liis  is  an  oll-lmml  business,  and  the  work  of 
a  momt'iit.  and  not  pretin'tlitafe<l  day  an<l  night.  When  the  lieavonlv 
afllatus  passes,  the  time  of  greedy  sroundrels  and  stealthy  thieves 
has  come. 

Those  who  predict  deanu'ss  and  clieapricss  fron)  the  wind, 
liold  that  a  wind  blowing  ovrr  residencrs  of  kinp*  and  ministers 
brings  <le{irnt'SH.  whereas  a  winil  roming  from  tlie  dwellings  of 
prisoners,  or  of  tlu*  dead,  brinies  cheapness.  Dearness  and  cheapness 
relVr  to  the  amount  of  pecks  and  l)iishels  to  be  got.  When  the 
wind  arrives,  the  buyers  of'  grain  raise  or  \owor  the  prices,  such  is 
the  wonderful  influence  exercised  hv  the  hravcnly  fluid  on  men 
and  things.  Tliiis  tlie  prioo  of  grain  ris<、s.  or  falls,  becomes  dear, 
or  clienp. 

1  Cltccrnilnoss,  anger,  grief,  joy,  love,  and  liatred.  It  is  more  common  to 
speak  of  Seven  I'a.ssions.  They  are  tlie  same  as  those  given  above,  but  joy  is 
replaced  by  foar,  aad  desire  Ls  added. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Phenomenal  Clianges. 


Ill 


Tn  the  book  on  the  Celestial  Governors 1  it  is  stated  that  tlie 
Avind  blowing  from  the  four  quarters  is  determined  on  tlie  morning 
of  New  Year's  Day.  Wlien  tlie  \vin«l  blows  frnra  tlie  south,  thriv 
will  be  (lrong)its:  when  it  blows  from  the  north,  inundations. 
Coining  from  tl"'  east,  it  fore  lux  It's  epidemics,  and  coming  from 
the  west,  war.  The  Great  Annalist  is  right  in  saying  that  water, 
dryness,  war,  and  diseases  are  jjredetormincd  from  the  wind,  for 
luck  and  mishap  of  men  und  tilings  depend  on  Heaven. 

It  is  spring  tlmt  animates  tilings,  and  winter  tliat  causes  them 
to  die.  Spring  vivifies,  winter  kills.  Sliould  Heaven  for  any  reason 
wish  spring  to  kill,  and  wintor  to  vivify,  things  would  not  die  or 
li ve  at  all,  why?  He<ause  the  life  of  things  is  governed  by  the 
Yong  principle,  and  their  death  depends  on  the  Yin. 2 

By  blowing  air  upon  a  person  one  ran  not  make  liiin  (，ol(l， 
nor  can  one  make  him  warm  by  breathing  upon  liim.  But  if  a 
person  who  lias  tluis  been  hlmvn  or  brt-athod  upon,  comes  into 
winter  or  summer,  he  will  have  tl"、  unpleasant  sensation  of  chill 
or  heat.  Tlie  cold  and  liot  fluids  depend  on  heavrn  and  earth, 
and  are  governed  by  the  Yin  and  the  Yang.  Wow  could  lmman 
affairs  and  government  liave  any  influence  upon  tliem? 

Moreover,  Heaven  i.s  the  root,  and  man  tlie  :ipcx.  Climbing 
uj»  a  tree,  wonder  tliat  the  brandies  oaimot  move  the  trunk, 
but,  if  the  trunk  is  rut  (low  n.  nil  tlie  twigs  witlifr.  Human  a  flairs 
resemble  the  branches  of  a  tree,  tliat  Avhicli  gives  warmth  is  like 
the  root  and  the  trunk. 

For  those  creatures  which  are  born  from  Heaven  and  filled 
witli  its  fluid  Heaven  is  the  master  in  the  same  in  an  nor  as  the 
ear,  the  oyo,  tlie  hand,  and  the  foot  are  ruled  by  the  heart.  When 
the  heart  has  that  iii"'iition，  the  oar  and  the  eye  hear  and  se<% 
and  tlie  band  aiul  tlie  foot  move  and  act.  To  maintain  that  Heaven 
rospontls  to  man  would  he  like  saving  that  the  heart  is  under  the 
command  of  tin*  car  and  tlie  ey<%  tlie  hand  ;itid  tlie  foot. 

Streamers  liaiiging  down  from  Hags  aiv  attachtul  to  the  fla^stall'. 
The  flagstaff  moving  eastward,  tlio^o  stream»'i>  follow,  and  float  west- 
ward. If  they  say  that  heat  ;tn<l  mid  follow  rewards  and  punisli- 
ments,  then  the  heavenly  fluid  must  be  like  those  streamers. 


' Shi-chi  chap.  27  p.  34v.  The  u  Cele-stial  Gm'miW  are  the  sun,  the  moon, 
and  the  planets.  The  passnge  referred  to  licrc  speaks  of  8  winds,  however,  and 
their  attributes  are  different  from  tliose  giv«'ii  by 

2  Heaven  could  not  purposely  act  against  the  laws  of  nature,  by  wliicli  tlie 
vegetation  grows  in  spring,  and  fades  in  winter. 


Digitized  by  Google 


112 


Luti-H«*iip:  H.  Metaphysical. 


The  fact  tliat  the  "  Hook  ，，  star  (Mercury)  is  amidst  the 
" House "  constfllation  forebodes  au  earth-quake.1  The  Great  Di- 
viner of  Ch  i  was  cognisant  of  this,  and  told  Duko  2  that  he 
could  shake  tlie  earth,  wliicli  Duke  (hiny  helifved.3  To  say  that 
a  sovereign  can  cause  heat  and  《'ol<l  is  like  Duke  ( 'fang's  trusting 
in  the  ability  of  tlie  Great  Diviner  to  shake  the  earth.  Man  cannot 
move  the  earth,  nor  <*an  lie  move  Heaven.  Heat  and  cold  are 
heavenly  fluids.  Heaven  is  very  higli.  man  very  small.  With  a 
small  rod  one  cannot  strike  a  bell,  and  with  a  fire- fly  one  cannot 
lirat  a  cauldron.  Why?  Because  a  Ik* II  is  large,  and  a  rod  short, 
a  cauldron  big,  and  a  ft  re-fly  small.  If  a  tiny  creature,  seven 
feet  liigh,4  would  attempt  to  influenco  the  mighty  fluid  of  great 
Heaven,  it  is  evident  that  it  would  not  liave  the  slightest  effect. 

VVlien  it  Iia.s  been  predotenninod  that  a  great  general  is  about 
to  enter  a  territory,  he  will  be  angry,  in  ease  the  air  is  cold,  and 
pleased,  if  it  be  warm.  Now.  joy  and  anger  are  called  fortli  by 
actions.  I'revious  to  his  entering  the  territory,  they  are  not  yet 
manifest,  and  do  not  come  forward,  before  tlie  conduct  of  the 
people  and  the  officials  lias  \woii  in(|iiired  into.  But  the  hot  or 
the  cold  fluids  have  been  there  previously.  If  joy  and  anger  evoked 
lieat  and  oold,  those  fluids  ought  to  appear  later  than  joy  and 
anger.  Therefore  only  the  hot  and  the  cold  fluids  evoke  the  sove- 
reign's pleasure  or  wrath. 

Some  will  say  1  Not  so;  tlie  greatest  sincerity  is  required.  In 
one's  actions  one  must  be  most  sinceiv,  as  Tsou  Yen  was.  who  im- 
plored Heaven,  when  frost  he«;an  to  fall,5  or  tlie  wife  of  Ch  i  L'mng^ 
who  by  her  tears  caused  the  city  wall  to  collapse.  How?  The 
heavenly  fluid  cannot  be  moved?' 

The  greatest  sincerity  is  shown  in  the  likes  and  dislikes  of 
the  heart.  When  fruits  are  hanging  before  a  man's  face,  no  more 
than  one  foot  away  from  his  mouth,  he  may  desire  to  eat  them, 
and  his  breath  may  touch  them,  yet  he  does  not  obtain  them 

1  Cf.  p.  127  and  SM-chi  chap.  27  p.  27v. 
' 546-4S8  b.c. 

3  We  learn  from  Iluai  iN'on  Tse  XII,  22  quoted  in  Ltnt-fu'-ng  IV,  13  (Pien-h*u) 
tliat  Yen  7V  told  the  Great  Diviner  that  tlu-  eartli-«jnake  would  take  place,  because 
the  "Hook"  star  was  betweeu  the  constellations  of  the  "House"  and  the  " Heart," 
whereupon  the  Qroat  Diviner  confessed  to  tlie  Duke  tliat  the  earth  would  sliake, 
but  that  it  would  not  be  his  doing  (cf.  p.  127). 

4  I.  e.  man.  The  anrient  Chinese  foot  was  much  smaller  than  the  one  now  in  use. 
" Cf.  chap.  XXI. 

«  On  officer  of  the  Ch'i  State,  who  was  slain  in  a  battle  against  the  (  hii 
Stat*  (cf.  Mmctus  Book  VI,  P.  II  chap.  6). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Phenomenal  Changes. 


113 


thereby.  But,  wlien  he  takes  them  in  his  lianil,  and  conveys  them 
to  his  mouth,  then  he  can  eat  them.  Even  small  fruits  wliich  can 
easily  be  moved  in  a  basket,  and  are  not  far  from  tlie  mouth, 
cannot  be  procurer!  merely  by  a  desire,  be  it  ever  so  strong.  How 
about  Heaven  then,  which  is  so  high  and  distant  from  us,  and 
whose  fluid  forms  the  slmpeless  enipyrean  without  beginning  or  end  ？ 

During  the  dog-days,  people  stand  against  the  wind,  and  in 
tlie  depth  of  winter,  they  sit  turned  towards  the  suu.  In  summer, 
they  are  anxious  to  obtain  coolness,  and  in  winter,  they  would  like 
to  have  warmth.  These  wishes  are  most  sincere.  When  their 
desires  reach  their  climax,  they  will  perhaps  stand  against  the 
wind,  and  simultaneously  fan  themselves,  or  turned  towards  the 
sun-sliine,  light  a  fire  in  a  stove.  Yet  Heaven  will  never  change 
its  fluid  for  summer  or  winter's  sake.  Heat  ami  rold  have  tht'ir 
iixo<l  periods,  which  are  never  transmuted  for  man's  sake.  With 
an  earnest  dt'sire  one  tloos  not  obtain  it,  how  uliould  it  be  brought 
about  by  rewards  and  punishments,  wlieo  the  thoughts  are  not 
longing  for  heat  or  cold  at  all? 

The  siglis  of  ten  tlinusaiul  peojile  cannot  move  Heaven,  how 
should  it  be  possible  that  tlie  sobs  of  Tsou  Yen  alone  could  cause 
the  frost  to  fall?  Could  tlie  [)rediranieiit  of  '/:、.",<  Yen  \m  compared 
to  that  of  Ch  U  Yuan ？  Was  his  unjust  imprisonment  like  jumping 
into  tbe  river?  Were  the  lamentations  of  tlio  Li-sao  and  the  Ch  tt- 
t  sel  nothing  more  than  a  sigh? ― When  Ch  ii  Yttan  died,  there  fell 
uo  frost  in  tbe  State  of  Chi u. 

This  happened  during  the  reign  of  the  Kings  Huai  and  Hsiang? 
At  the  time  of  the  Kings  Li  and  H'm,3  Pirn  Ho*  presented  them 
with  a  ja<le-stone,  ami  had  his  two  feet  cut  off.  OlTering  his  stone 
he  wept,  till  his  tears  ran  dry,  when  he  went  on  weeping  blood. 
Can  the  sincerity  of  Tsau  Yen  bear  a  comparison  with  Pien  Has 
sufferings,  or  liis  unjust  arrest  with  the  amputation  of  the  feet? 
Can  the  sighs  towards  heaven  be  put  on  a  parallel  with  tears  of 
blood ？   Sighs  are  surely  not  like  tears,  nor  Tsau  Yen's  imprisonment 


1  The  " Elegies  of  CA'u"  comprising  the  Ia-mo  and  some  other  poems  of 
Ch'ii  Y«an  and  his  contemporaries,  all  plaintive  piece*  referring  to  <  h'u  }'uan'«  disgrace. 

， King  Huai  of  (Vu  327-294,  King  (h'inff  llMang  204-201.  Chu  luon 
committed  .suicide  in  204  b.c. 

J  King  Wu  reigned  from  739-6S8.  His  predecessor  is  called  Hnung  HitUn 
(756-739)  in  the  Shi-cM,  not  Li. 

*  Pien  Ho  was  taken  for  an  impostor,  and  first  sentenced  to  have  his  left 
foot  cut  off.  When  he  presented  the  stone,  a  second  time,  his  right  foot  was  cat 
off.    Ai  last  the  genuineneis  of  the  jade-stone  was  discovered. 


Digitized  by  Google 


114 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


like  the  cuttin*;  of  th'、  feet.  Considering  thoir  grievances  Tw—"t  Yen  is  not 
h'en  Hon  equal.  Yft  at  that  tinu;  no  frost  waa  seen  in  tlie  Cfi  u  country. 

Li  S,sc  1  and  ( 'hao  Kao  -  caused  the  death  of  the  cro\vn-prin«v 
Fn  Sti  by  tlieir  calumnies.  Mtug  T  u  n  3  and  Mt'ng  Au*  were  involvt'd 
in  his  fall.  At  tlmt  timt*  they  all  gave  vent  to  tlieir  pain,  which 
was  like  sighing.  Their  mislortmu'  culminated  in  death,  and  was 
not  limited  to  unjust  banishment.  Albeit  yet  no  cold  air  、vas  pro- 
duced, where  they  died. 

C/t  in  buried  alive  400,000  s^liliers  of  ( '/too  brlow  (  h  nng  /> 
where  they  \v<>re  all  thrown  into  pits  at  the  same  \'um\  Tlit'ir 
wails  and  cries  tlien  \\  en*  more  than  sighs.  Kvcn  if  tlu-ir  simu'iity 
was  less  than  that  of  '/:、■''',<  )Vv/,  \  *»t  the  suflV'rin^s  of  400.000  people 
must  have  boon  i'.oininiMisurate  to  the  pain  o(  one  wise  man,  at"l 
the  crio8  they  uttonMl.  wliilr  falling  int<»  the  pits,  must  havo  bot'ii 
worse  than  tho  moans  of  one  fVttt'ml  prisoner. 

In  spite  of  this  no  hoar-frost  was  seen  falling  down  below 
Ch muj-jt  iug,  when  the  above  related  ovont  took  place. 

We  read  in  tlu-  ••/•,/-/',、■'•",/'•  chapter: ― °-  The  people  maltreats  I 
universally  romjilaiiiod  that  tli<、v  liad  not  failed  against  the  Iiuler 
of  Heaven."  7  This  moans  that  I'h'ili  Yn's  subjects  sulIVriiig  unde^r 
his  vexations  universally  complained  that  they  lia<l  not  sinn«*il 
against  tiigh  Moaven.  Since  the  complaints  of  a  whole  populaiv 
could  not  cause  a  fall  of  frost,  tl"、  story  about  l^ou  Yen  is  most 
likely  ficticious  also. 

In  tlie  south  it  is  extremely  liot:— tlie  sand  burns,  8tono« 
rruinble  into  dust,  and  father  and  son  bathe  in  tlie  same  wator. 
In  the  nortl*  it  is  bitterly  rold  ：— wat«M-  turns  into  ice.  the  earth 
cracks,  and  father  and  son  huddle  together  in  the  same  flon.  Yen 
is  situated  in  the  north.  IWm  Y''"  was  there  in  the  5th  montli  of 
C/iou^  which  com'sponds  to  the  3d  month  of  the  corrected  year. 


1  Cf.  p.  171. 

2  A  eunuch,  who  together  with  Li  Sse  caused  the  death  of  Fu  Su，  eldest  son  of 
( h  in  >7 "力 Ihiaug  Ti,  and  under  I  In  Hai  usurped  nil  power.  In  2*  C  he  was 
assassinated  by  order  of  /V  )'mp%  son  of  Fu  Su. 

s  Cf.p.  167. 

4  The  grand  father  of  M*-ng  T  ien,  also  a  general  of  Shih  Huang  Ti. 
' Cf.  p.  m  and  p.  166. 

fi  The  ('liapter  on  Punishments  in  tlie  Slm-kimj,  now  entitled  Lu-hMng. 

7  Shu-kinff,  Lu-hMn9,  Pt.  V,  Bk.  XXVJ1.  4  (U^r,  Vol.  III.  Pt.  II,  p.、!》2、. 

s  The  <  hou  epoch.  The  ( 'hoit  calendar  began  with  tlie  1 1th  month,  the  (  h'ni 
calendar  with  the  10th.  In  104  n.«\  Han  Wu  Ti  corrected  the  rjilendar,  and  made 
I  lie  year  coiniiieiue  with  the  1st  montli,  so  tlie  ( ftou  were  2  mouths  ahead  with 
their  inontlis. 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Phenonienal  Changes. 


115 


In  the  i-entral  provinces  frost,  and  snow-falls  are  of  frequent  occur- 
rence during  the  first  and  the  second  months,  la  tlie  northern 
region,  where  it  is  very  cold,  frost  may  fall  oven  during  the  third 
month,  and  that  would  not  be  an  extraordinary  phenomenon.  Pt*r- 
liaps  it  was  still  cold  in  the  north  in  the  third  mouth,  and  frost 
happentul  to  fall,  when  by  chance  T 湖 Yen  gave  vent  to  his  feelings, 
which  just  coinciiled  with  tlie  frost. 

It  lias  bt»en  recorded  that  in  Yen  there  was  the  "  Cold  VaUey、" 
where  the  five  grains  did  not  grow.'  Tsou  Yen  blew  the  flute,  and 
tlie  " Cold  Valley"  became  warm.  Consequently  Tsou  Ym  was  able 
to  make  tlie  air  warm,  and  also  to  make  it  cold.  How  do  we 
know  that  T.son  Yen  did  not  communicate  liis  grievances  to  his 
contemporaries,  and  instead  manifested  his  sinrerity  through  the 
heavenly  fluid?  Did  he  secretly  blow  tlie  tlutc  in  the  valley  of 
Ym,  and  malic  the  air  of  tlie  prison  cold,  imploring  Heaven  for 
that  purpose?    For  otliorwise,  why  did  the  frost  fall ？ 

Fan  Sml  calumniated  by  Ifsfl  Chi  a  was  most  disgracefully  treat- 
ed by  Wei  (7t  i,  liad  his  back  broken,  and  itis  ribs  doubled  up. 
( 'Imng  17 a  while  travelling  in  C/t  ",  was  arrested  by  the  prime  minister 
<»f  (7t'u,  and  beaten,  until  the  blood  ran  out.  The  w  ay  in  wliich 
t hose  two  gentlemen  were  maltreated  lias  bt*cn  narrated  by  the 
Great  Annalist.8  The  imprisonment  of  T'son  Yen  resembles  the  ad- 
ventures of  Fan  Sui  and  ( 'hauy  Yi.  Why  does  S^.e  Ma  ('It  ien  omit 
to  mention  this?  Siiire  it  is  not  mentioned  in  '/'.sou  Yen's  biography 
that  during  liis  imprisoument  lie  caused  the  Irost  to  fall,  it  must 
he  an  invention,  and  a  random  statement  like  tlio  story  of  Prince 
Tan,*  who  is  believed  to  have  ordered  the  sun  to  return  to  the 

1  A  native  of  Win  of  humble  origin,  who  first  served  under  Hgu  Ckia,  and 
accompanied  him  on  a  mission  to  the  court  of  King  liming  of  Ch  i  (6%  683).  This 
prince  appreciating  Fan  Sui  for  liis  great  dialectical  skill,  sent  liim  some  presents. 
Him  Chia  presuming  tliat  Fan  Sui  had  betrayed  some  State  secrets  of  Wei,  denounced 
liis  sen-ant  to  the  premier  of  We!,  Wei  ( 'h  i,  who  iind  him  beaten  almost  to  death. 
Fan  Sui  was  then  wrapped  in  a  mat,  and  thrown  into  n  privy,  where  the  drunken 
guests  urinated  upon  him.  Still  he  managed  to  escape,  and  later  on  became  minister 
in  Ch'in. 

， Also  a  native  of  the  Wei  State  from  a  j>oor  funiily,  who  played  a  very 
iuiportatit  political  role  in  Ch'in  and  ^Ye^.  In  his  youth,  he  was  suspected  in  Ch'u 
of  having  stolen  a  valuable  gem,  and  severely  beaten.    Died  310  B.C. 

»  SM-ehi  chap.  79  and  70. 

*  Prince  Tan  of  Yen  was  detained  as  a  hostage  in  the  Ch'in  State.  Ite  sover- 
eign promised  with  an  oath  to  set  him  free,  when  the  sun  returned  to  the  meridian, 
and  Heaven  rained  grain,  when  the  crows  gut  white  heads,  and  the  horses,  horns, 
and  when  the  wooden  elephants,  decorating  the  kitchen  door,  got  legs  of  flosh.  Heaven 

Digitized  by  Google 


116 


Lun-Hrng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


meridian,1  and  Heaven  to  rain  grain.  Thus  we  may  assume  that 
the  story  about  the  frost  falling  down  upon  Tsou  Yen  imploring; 
Heaven  is  untrue,  an<l  that  the  report  of  the  wife  of  Ch  i  Liang 
causing  the  city  wall  to  collapse  is  false. 

When  Tuti-nuto 2  rebelled,  the  Viscount  Ihiang  of  ('hat,  le<l 
an  army  against  it  to  iuve«t  it.  Wlien  his  soldiers  had  arrived 
at  the  foot  of  the  city  wall,  more  than  one  hundred  feet  of  this 
wall  of  Tun-mao  crumbled  down.  Viscount  Ihiwtg  thereupon  sheathed 
his  sword,  and  went  back.  If  tlio  wife  of  Ch  i  Liang  caused  tlio 
collapse  of  the  city  wall  by  her  tears,  was  tliere  anybody  crying 
among;  Hsiany  Tse\s  men?  Wlien  ( 7t  in  was  about  to  be  extinguish- 
ed, a  city  gate  collapsed  inside,  and  when  the  house  of  Ho  Kuang * 
was  going  to  ruin,  n  wall  of  the  palace  was  demolished  of  itself. 
Who  was  weeping  in  the  (、h， palace,  or  frying  in  the  house  of 
Ilo  Kvong?  The  collapse  of  the  j^ate,  and  the  demolition  of  the 
wall  were  signs  of  the  catastrophe  awaiting  Ch  i"  and  Ho. 

Perhaps  at  tlu*  time,  wlirn  tin*  (7/  #'  State8  was  about  to  bo 
subverted,  the  wife  of  (7/  i  Liatxj  liappened  to  cry  at  the  foot  of  the 
wall,  just  ns  '/'sou  Yru  rlianoed  to  cry  to  Heaven,  when  it  was  still  very 
cold  in  the  Yeu  State.  There  was  a  correspondence  of  events  and 
a  concordance  of  time.  Eye-\vi messes  and  people  who  heard  about 
it,  most  likely  were  of  this  opinion.  Moreover,  provided  that  the 
city  wall  was  old,  and  the  house-wall,  rotten,  there  must  have 
been  a  collapse,  and  a  destruction.  If  the  tears  of  one  woman 
could  make  50  foet  of  the  wall  tumble  (Iowd,  the  wall  must  have 
been  such,  that  one  might  have  pushed  a  beam  of  30  feet  into  it 
with  one  finger. 

During  the  Spring  and  Autumn  period  several  mountains  were 
transformed  in  an  extraordinary  way.  Mountains  and  walls  belong 
to  the  sa«e  class.  If  tears  subvert  a  city  wall,  can  tliey  demolish 
a  mountain  also?    If  somebody  in  white  mourning  like  a  woman 

helped  the  Prince,  and  hrought  abotit  these  wonders,  when  Tan  was  released,  or,  as 
others  say,  he  made  his  escape  in  230  b.c.  The  story  is  narrated  in  Lun-heng  V,  7 
(Kan-hmi). 

1  The  same  is  said  of  Hsin 】 -， Pmg  (Shi-cM  chap.  28  p.  19v). 
•  A  city  in  Honan. 
»  45G-424  B.r. 

4  A  faithful  servant  of  the  Emperor  Hun  Wu  Ti，  who  appointed  him  Regent 
for  his  minor  son,  ( 'hao  Ti.  He  died  in  t)h  B.r.  His  family  was  mixed  up  in  a 
palace  intrigue  aiming  at  the  de}>osition  of  the  reigiiitig  emperor,  which  wm  dis- 
covered, when  all  the  members  of  liis  family  were  extenninated. 

:' Instead  ofCh'i^  >| ；已 , an  old  feudal  State  in  Honan,  we  ought  probably  to  read 
the  name  of  the  (  h'i1  State  in  ShanUmg,  of  which  Ch'i  Uang  waa  a  native. 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Phenomenal  Changes. 


117 


crios  so,  that  his  tears  How  like  rivers,  people  generally  believe 
that  a  city  wall  can  collapse  through  these  tears,  and  regard  it 
as  quite  the  proper  thing.  But  Ch  i  Liany  died  during  the  cam- 
paign, and  did  not  return.  His  wife  went  to  meet  him.  The  Prince 
of  Lu  offered  his  condolence  on  the  road,  which  his  wife  did  not 
accept.  When  the  coffin  had  arrived  in  her  house,  the  Prince  of 
Lu  condoled  with  her  again.1  She  did  not  say  a  word,  and  cried 
at  the  loot  of  the  wall.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  her  husband  had 
died  in  the  campaign,  therefore  he  was  not  in  the  wall,  and,  if  liis 
wife  cried  turned  towards  the  t;ity  wall,  this  was  not  the  right 
plac«.  In  short,  it  is  again  an  unfounded  assertion  that  the  wife 
of  Ch'i  Liang  caused  the  city  wall  to  tumble  down  by  her  tears.8 
On  this  principle  of  sympathetic  actions  a  wliite  halo  encir- 
cled the  sun,  when  Ching  K'o  stabbed  the  king  of  (7t  in,3  and 
eclipsed  the  Meiades,  wlien  the  scholar  from  HVv  drew  up  tlie  strat- 
agem of  Ch  any-piny  for  Ch  in.*  This  agaiu  is  an  absurdity.  When 
Yu  Tse^  was  planning  the  murder  of  Viscount  Jhiaug,  and  was  lying 
under  a  bridge,  Hsianxj  Tses  heart  throbbed,  as  lie  approac:li<*d  the 
bridge.  Kuan  Kao°  intended  to  murtlcr  Kao  Tm、  and  had  concealejl 
a  man  in  the  wall.  When  Kao  '/:、•"  arrived  at  Pu-jt'n?  his  heart 
also  beat  high.8  Those  two  iiidivkluals  being  about  to  stab  the 
two  princes,  the  hearts  of  the  latter  palpitated.  If  we  n'a«(>u  in 
a  proper  way,  we  cannot  admit  that  the  prim'es  wrre  airected  by 
tin1  souls  of  the  two  assassius,  and  should  we  do  so  in  tlie  case 
of  the  king  of  Ch  in ？  When  ( himj  K  o  was  preparing  to  stab 
liim,  tl»e  king's  heart  was  not  moved,  but  a  white  halo  encircled 

1  We  learn  from  the  Tso-ch 請， Duke  Hmmg  23rd  year  (550  B.c.)  (Legge, 
Claasics  Vol  V，  Pt.  II,  p.  504)  and  from  the  Liki,  T  an  Kuny  Ft.  III，  I  {Legge,  Sacred 
Books  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  18H)  Uiat,  when  tlic  bier  of  (  hi  Liang  was  brought  home  to 
(h  i,  thf  Marquis  of  Ch'i,  Chuang,  sent  an  oflicer  to  present  his  coiidoleucea,  but 
the  widow  declined  them,  because  tiic  road  was  nut  tlie  proper  place  to  accept 
condolences.  The  Marquis  tlien  sent  them  to  her  house.  The  "  Prince  of  Lu^  o( 
our  text  is  probably  a  niinprint,  for  why  should  the  prince  *»f  Lu  condole  in  Ch'i? 

1  The  Lieh-nU-c/man  relates  that  Ch  i  Liang  ft  wife  cried  seven  days  over  her 
husband's  corpse  under  the  city  wall,  until  it  collapsed,  and  tlten  died  by  jumping 
into  a  river. 

*  Cf.  chap.  XXXIX  and  XL. 

*  Cf.  p.114. 

1 】'fi  Jang,  a  native  of  the  Chin  State,  wlio  made  an 議 uccessful  attempt  on 
the  life  of  ViscounJ  Htfiang  of  Chao,  who  had  killed  !ii.s  master,  Earl  (  l"h.  Vid. 
chap.  XXIX. 

*  A  minister  of  Chao. 

7  A  place  iu  the  prefecture  of  Shun-U'-fu  (ChiU). 

*  Thig  attempt  on  the  life  of  Han  Kao  Tim  in  1!»9  b.c.  was  frustrated. 


Digitized  by  Google 


118 


Lun-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


the  sun.  This  crh'stia]  plicnonu'iion  <»f  a  white  halo  pnt'in'ling  tl"、 
sun  liappcned  of  its  own  accord,  and  it  was  not  the  mind  of  Cluny 
K  o  which  produced  it. 

Mt'n  urt/  bctwiM'n  tlif  fonst«,llations  of  tin*  House  and  thf  Heart 
denotes  an  impending  earth-quake.  When  an  earth-quak*'  is  ^oiiii^ 
to  take  phu't',  Mercury  corresponds  to  t he  //"〃、、,  and  tlic  Heart.  Tl"、 
offuscation  <»f  the  l^eiades  by  Vnm.s  is  like  the  position  oi*  Mrrcurt/ 
between  the  House  atid  tlic  Heart.  Tlierelbrc  the  assertion  that  tin' 
design  of  ('It  ',"y_f>  in;/,  dcvisnl  Ijy  tin*  s<'li,"ar  from  UW,  causetl  Vmu.s 
to  erlipao  the  IHeiath-.s,  is  wry  doubtful. 

When  Jujtitcr  injured  tlic  Bird 1  and  tlie  Tail  stare,2  Chou  and 
( 7i  u  w <t»'  visitt'd  wifli  disiistrrs,  and  \vli*in  a  lVatlier-like  lluid  ap- 
|Mjar«'il,  Simy,  11 W, and  ( 'Ut'ntj  suHn'rcd  inisi'ortuui's.  At  t  hat 
time,  ( 'hon  and  C/i  u  had  not  done  any  wrong,  nor  had  Suikj.  Wei, 
( 7/f1//,  or  ( 'ln'ny  %'x >iiiiuitt<'(l  any  wii'krclm'ss.  However,  Juj/iter  first 
occupied  the  j»1«tc»*  oi'  the  Tail  star,  and  the  lluid  of  misfortune,  for 
a  while,  d«'scend«Hl  from  lu'avon,  whereupon  <  '/ton  a ud  C/i  "  had  their 
disasters,  and  Sung,  Wri.  CIh'u,  and  ( suflVrctl  likowis**  at  tlit' 
same  time.  .Jupiter  causi'd  injury  to  ( 'hou  and  I'h  u,  as  the  lieavon- 
ly  fluid  did  to  tin'  four  States.  Who  knows  but  that  the  、vliitr 
halo  oncin-Iinj*  tlu-  sun,  caused  tlic  attempt  on  tlie  Wt'e  oi*  tin*  king 
of  Ui'ii"  and  that  Yemus  (M-lipsing  the  /Y,'/W '-〜 brought  about  t\w 
stratagem  of  Ch  amj-}»imf> 

1  The  star  ('or  Hydra,  mentioned  in  the  Sha-king  (ol'.  Vol. 【II，  Pt.  I,  p. 

'l  The  "  Tail "  i.s  a  coiistellation  consisting  ol'  nine  stars  in  the  tail  of  Scorpio, 
the  6th  of  tlie  2S  Solar  Mansions. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Reprimands. 


119 


CHAPTER  VI. 
On  Reprimands  {Ch'ien-kao). 

In  regard  to  extraordinary  calamities  they  say  that,  wlien  of 
old  u  sovereign  in  his  administration  departed  from  thr  riglit  way. 
Heaven  reprimanded  him  by  visiting  him  witli  calamities.  Those 
calamities  are  manifold.  Heat  and  cold  are  put  forward  as  proof. 
Wlien  a  prince  punishes  at  a  wrong  time,  it  becomes  cold,  aud 
when  lie  grants  rewards,  but  not  at  the  right  momeut,  it  becomes 
warm.  The  Spirit  of  Heaven  reprimands  a  sovereign  in  the  same 
manner,  as  a  sovereign  allows  his  displeasure  to  his  subjects.  There- 
fore King  Yen  of  Ch'u1  said,  "  Heaven  (lot's  not  seud  down  mis- 
foitunes.  Has  Heaven  forgotten  me?"  Those  calamities  are  a 
reproof,  therefore  King  Yen  thought  of  tliem  with  fear. 

I  say  that  this  set'ins  very  doubtful  to  me.  The  calamities  of 
a  State  are  like  the  misfortunes  of  an  individual.  If  they  say  that 
Heaven  reprimands  a  sovereign  through  calamities,  (lot's  it  also 
ropr<»ve  an  individual  through  his  mis  fortunes?  Since  the  indi- 
vidual is  known  to  us,  we  may  make  use  of  the  human  body  for 
comparison.  A  sickness  of  tlie  body  is  like  a  calamity  from  Heaven. 
When  the  circulation  of  die  blood  is  not  iu  order,  a  mau  contracts 
a  disease,  and  when  the  wind  and  tlie  air  do  not  agree,  the  year 
develops  calainitie».  Provided  that  Heaven  blames  tlie  adminis- 
tration of  a  State  by  calamities,  does  it  blame  an  individual  by 
his  sickness? 

By  fermenting  wine  in  jars,  and  cooking  meat  in  cauldrons, 
one  wishes  to  make  their  tastes  palatable*.  Sometimes  they  are 
too  salty,  bitter,  sour,  or  insipid,  and  not  to  our  taste,  just  a 
spoonful  of  nu'diciue  <loes  not  taste  well.  The  calamities  of  Heaven 
are  like  the  bad  taste  of  cooked  meat  or  ierniented  wine.  If  calam- 
ities are  believed  to  tu'  expressive  of  Heaven's  displeasure,  we 
ou«£ht  to  sec  such  manifestations  also  in  case  of  a  mistake  in 
cooking  or  fermenting.  One  measures  big  things  by  small  ones, 
and  learns  to  know  Heaven,  if  one  understands  analogies. 


120 


Lun  -  Heiig :  B.  Metaphysical. 


Were  King  Yen.^  knowle<lge  like  that  of  Confucius  his  utter- 
ance could  be  believed,  but  as  a  leading  prince  during  a  time  of 
decay,  lie  did  not  possess  more  ability  than  the  phenomenal ists,1 
and  his  words  are  not  to  be  trusted.    Hence  my  doubts. 

Heaven's  principle,  spontaneity,  consists  in  inaction.  If  it  did 
reprimand  people,  that  would  be  action,  and  not  spontaneous.  The 
school  of  Ihuing  Ti  and  Lao  T.se  arguing  on  Heaven's  principle  have 
found  the  truth. 

If  Heaven  could  really  reprimand  the  sovereign,  it  should 
change  the  iluid  to  call  his  attention.  In  case  the  prince  punished 
at  the  wrong  time,  the  fluid  of  punishment  would  be  cold,  and 
Heaven  cmglit  to  make  it  warm,  and  should  the  prince  reward 
unseasonably,  tlu*  Muid  of  reward  would  be  warm,  and  it  would 
be  incumbent  upon  Heavi*n  to  make  it  cold.  A  transmutation  of 
the  fluid  in  case  of  the  perversion  of  government  would  call  the 
attention  of  the  sovereign  to  his  fault.  Now  Heaven  lets  the  cold 
und  the  heat'  go  on,  and  again  causes  cold  and  heat  with  a  view 
to  reprove  the  sovereign,  and  to  induce  him  to  change. 

The  illustrious  prince  Tnn  Fh3  thinking  that  he  might  elevate 
the  later  king  ('/〃•，  on  purpose  changed  his  name  of  Chi  into  /''•， 
which  is  synonyinous  with  //  ― k  heir.'  'I'  ni  Po  took  the  bint,  aud 
went  to  collect  medicines  in  Wu  and  Yileh  in  order  to  get  out  of 
King  Chi's  way.3  Had  tlie  illustrious  prince  not  changed  the  name 
of  Chi,  and  again  styled  him  Li,  how  could  the  eldest  son  have 
taken  the  hint,  and  got  himself  out  of  the  way  '.'  Now,  if  rewards 
and  punish  merits  arc  not  givt-n  in  the  proper  way,  and  Heaven 
wishes  a  change  of  administration,  it  ought  to  use  a  different  fluid, 
just  as  tlie  illustrious  prince  changed  the  name  of  Chi  Instead  oi' 
that  it  again  produces  the  same  fluid  to  show  its  displeasure  to 
the  sovereign,  but,  when  will  the  latter  become  aware  of  it,  and 
see  the  mistake  he  lias  made  in  rewarding  and  punisliing? 

When  a  guitar-player  makes  a  mistake  in  tightening  the  cords 
and  placing  the  bridges,  **  kuuy "  and  "  din"g"  *  change  tlieir  tunes. 
When  the  music-master  hears  it,  he  changes  the  strings,  and  shifts 
the  bridges.  Heaven  sees  mistakes  in  rewarding  and  punishing, 
as  the  music-master  takes  notice  of  the  wrong  handling  of  the  cords 
and  bridges.    If  Heaven  did  not  change  the  fluid  to  rouse  the 


1  Who  explain  natural  phenomena  by  transcendent  caases. 

， The  grandfather  of  W  rn  Wunff,  the  founder  of  the  (  hou  dynasty. 

， Cf.p.131. 

*  Tlie  first  and  the  .second  of  Uie  five  ancient  notes  of  the  Chines«  gamut. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Reprimands. 


121 


sovereign,  on  the  contrary,  still  increased  it,  and  made  the  wrong 
worse,  it  would  be  unprincipled,  and  blindly  commit  the  same 
mistake  as  the  sovereign,  which  cannot  be. 

Chmt  had  banquets  lasting  the  whole  night ；  Wen  Wang  said 
every  morning  and  evening,  "Pour  out  this  wine  in  libation."  1  CtU、 
was  very  extravagant  in  sacritices:  Yen  Tsez  offered  a  sucking  pig 
in  the  temple,  which  did  not  fill  the  dish.4  Such  disapprobation  was 
necessary  to  bring  about  a  change. 

When  sons  and  younger  brothers  are  impudeiit,  their  fathers 
and  older  brothers  instruct  tht* m  in  politeness.  When  officials  be- 
have rudely,  their  elders  teach  them  good  manners.  K  ang  <S/"<6  and 
Po  Ch  t'n"  disregarded  the  duties  oi'  s(ms  and  younger  brothers.  They 
called  upon  Chou  Kuny,  prostrated  themselves,  and  rose  in  a  haughty 
manner.  Thrice  tliey  called,  and  tlirice  they  were  bambooed.  Tliey 
went  to  see  Sitting  Tse.1  Sluing  Tse  bade  them  look  at  the  pine  and 
the  Rottlera.  Both  looked  at  the  pine  and  the  Rottlera.  Their 
hearts  were  moved,  tliey  caught  the  meaning,  and  undt'ratood  the 
rules  of  etiquette  to  be  observed  between  father  and  son." 

Choti  Knttg  might  liave  followed  the  two  princes  in  their 
haughtiness,  and  S/mng  Tse  might  have  imitated  their  arrogance,  but 
it  was  necessary  to  resort  to  blows  and  parables  to  make  tliem 
see  the  difference,  and  awaken  their  conscience  by  this  strange 
procedure.  The  wrong  government  of  a  sovereign  is  like  the  bad 
hehaviour  of  tlie  two  princes.  If  Heaven  did  not  make  any  an- 
nouncement about  tho  style  of  government  in  order  to  rouse  the 
conscience,  just  as  the  two  princes  were  roused,  when  looking  at 
the  pine  and  Rottlera,  but  on  the  contrary  made  the  mistake  in 
rewarding  and  punishing  his  own  hy  requiting  the  sovereign  with 
heat  and  cold,  Heaven's  fault  would  not  be  less  than  that  of  the 
sovereign. 

It  cannot  be  the  intention  of  high  Heaven  that  people  s  con- 
science should  not  be  roused,  and  tliat  one  fluid  should  be  exactly 
like  the  other.  It  would  not  love  its  subjects,  nor  reprimand 
them  in  this  way.    All  things  which  ran  destroy  one  another,  must 


Shuking  Part  V,  Bk  X,  2  、Uggt、  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II，  p.  3W)  cf.  chap.  XXXIX. 
The  (  h'i  State  in  Shantunff. 

Yen  Ying,  an  official  of  <  'h  i,  noted  for  his  thriAy  habits,  died  493  B.C. 
So  small  wm  the  offering. 

A  younger  brother  of  f  'hou  Kung,  the  first  Duke  of  Wei. 

A  sou  of  (  'hoa  Kung  und  liis  successor  in  the  Dukedom  of  Lu, 

A  tiiinister  of  Wu  Wang. 

The  lofty  pine  and  tlic  low  Hottleia  tree  are  emblems  of  father  and  son. 


Digitized  by  Google 


122  Lun  -  H»"ng :  B.  Metaphysical. 

have  a  diirerent  nature,  whereas  those  winch  further  and  complete 
eacli  other,  arc  of  the  same  Huul.  Li 1  below  and  7«»2  above  are 
called  transformation,3  whicli  is  equivalent  to  change.  •  Fire  and 
metal  are  did'orent  Uuids,  tlu'rofore  tliev  can  change  one  another. 
If  they  wore  both  fire,  or  both  metal,  how  could  they  complete 
each  otlier? 

CI  I  H  Yilnn  was  sick  of  the  stench  aud  filth4  of  Cltuy  therefore 
lie  comj)ostM|  tlie  stan/as  <m  peri\iin<'S  ami  purity.  The  fisherman 
reinonslratcd  with  him  lor  not  following  the  common  habits,  there- 
upon h«'  spoke  the  words  on  bathing.  Whenever  a  man  fet-ls  un- 
cloan,  some  will  advise  him  to  put  on  i'ragrant  flowers,  others  t<» 
carry  a  pig.  Hotli  ;id\  icet*  aim  at  removing  stoncli  and  filth.  Which 
is  ri«jl»t,  aixl  wTiich  w  ronji '.' '  At  all  events,  tlxTc  must  be  a  clianjie, 
but  no  iiu'irw  l)y  any  im';ms.  If  heat  and  cold  are  produced  as 
a  pnitost  against  iv warding  or  punishing,  could  they  be  changed 
tht'n'by  tlion? 

11  si  .、/,'"  /'aofi  used  to  tighten  his  leather  belt  to  soothe  himself, 
and  TmKj  An  Yi'i '  would  loosrn  the  strings  of  }iis  girtllc  to  stimulate 
liimsell'.  J  licsc  two  wise  men  knew  tliat  tin1  belt  and  the  gi nlle 
will  help  us  to  oliangc  couiitenaiutc,  coiisomicntly  tliey  made  usp 
of  them  l'or  the  jmrpose  oi'  rrjiressin^;  their  bodily  weakness,  which 
was  very  intelligent  ituU*<M|.  If  in  case  of  bad  government  of  a 
sovereign  high  Ilea ven  did  not  rcpritnand  liim  with  another  lluid. 
that  In*  niiglit  clianiir.  on  the  I'ontrnrv,  followed  his  error,  emitting  the 
sam'、  tluid,  Hen  \  en's  \\  isdom  would  be  inferior  to  that  of  the  two  men. 

King  Chudinj  of  ( 7/  u s  luul  a  passion  for  limiting,  therefore 
Lady  F'tu  did  not  eat  any  j»aino,  or  jioultrv.  Duke  Mu  of  Chin9 
was  very  fond  of  voluj)tious  music,  for  this  reason  the  Princess  of 
Hua  Yaiuj  docliiu'd  to  listen  to  the  turn's  oi'  Ch' eity  and  HW.'°  The 


1  The  3rd  diagram. 

a  The  :')Sih  diagram. 

'•■  In  tlie  terminology  of  tho  Yi-hhtg. 

*  Filth  iit  a  iiK'tapborical  sense. 

h  The  first  adviie  of  courso.  Bad  odour  «an  be  removed  by  its  contrary, 
perfumes,  but  not  by  more  stench. 

r'  A  worthy  of  the  ">tli  century  ».c  {Giirs,  liioyr.  Dkt.  N.  (»7S). 

' AiiotlitT  laiiious  rharat  tcr  »>1"  old  <"',•"，  liiotjr.  Diet.  N.  20SS).  GUm  gives 
another  version  of  the  peculiarities  of  tin?  two  gentlemen  regarding  their  belts.  I  f. 
chap.  XXXI. 

8  (？  12-f>bi>  b.c. 

10  The  music  of  these  two  States  was  considered  licentious,  and  most  ob- 
jectionable. 


Digitized  by  Googl 


On  Reprimand 


128 


two  ladies  found  faulr  witli  tlio  two  princes.  Tlicv  opposed  llicir 
wishes,  and  did  not  agree  to  wliat  tliey  did.  Hraven,  on  the  other 
hand,  sliows  its  disapproval  of  tin*  sovereign's  rewarding  aud 
punishing  by  letting  liim  act  as  lu«  pleases,  and  still  incrcasiiifj;  the 
Huitl.  l  lius  the  virtu«、  of  high  Heaven  would  not  be  equal  to  that 
«>f  the  two  wise  ladies. 

To  remonstrate  means  to  reject  by  words.  To  keep  the  good, 
and  reject  the  bad  must  i-crtainly  b«*  regarded  ;is  a  mistake.  King 
A/m  of  ( 7iou  relie<l  on  punishnu'iits.  In  the  ChaptiM-  on  Punishments 
lie  says  tliat  violence  i»  requited  with  fore*'. 1  Fon  o  aud  violence 
are  both  bad.  To  requite  evil  with  evil  is  the  most  serious  misrule. 
Now,  in  criminal  law  not  to  give  inerfy,  when  it  should  l)e  given, 
is  wicked.  Heaven,  however,  adds  w  rong  to  、vroi'g  to  corrcs[K)n(l  to 
it.    Thus  Heaven  would  act  like  King  Mu. 

With  goodness  one  combats  badness,  and  with  badness  good 
people  are  friglitfiied.  This  is  the  way  to  acitnonish  people:,  aiut 
to  induce  them  to  do  .、•/'〃〃  exhorted  Yil  saying:  — '' Be  not 

as  overbearing  as  Ton  f  7/«." 2  Clum  Kuug  called  King  Ch  eng  and 
said  to  him,  "Be  not  like  King  (  lion  o!  3    '  Not '  is  prevent- 

ive. Tan  Ch"  and  (lion  of  Yin  were  the  greatest  sc«mnclrcls,  tlicre- 
foiv  the  word  4  not  ，  was  used  to  prevent  them  (from  following 
their  example);  Shun  and  (  7iou  Knoy  said  "  Be  n<jt  like,"  wlio  would 
say  "  Be  lik«»?  "  The  Saj^ew  disoriininattHl  betu  oen  the  positive  and 
the  negative,  would  tliey  have  reproved  the  wrong  doing  by  doing 
wrong  themselves,  or  would  they  by  continuing  the  faults  of  others 
have  even  increased  tlie  evil?  Heaven  and  man  obey  the  same 
Jaw,  uiul  great  men  equal  Heaven  in  virtue.  Sages  and  worthies 
reform  bad  people  by  goodness.  If  Ilea ven  ail 山, <l  、、- roug  to  evil,  would 
that  be  a  manifestation  oftlie  same  law  .  or  show  tliesimihirity  of  virtue.' 

The  emperor  Ihiao  \Yu 4  took  a  great  interest  in  immortals. 
Sse  Ma  Hsiang  Jus  presented  to  In'in  a  poem  on  the  Great  Man,  l>y 
which  the  emperor  became  so  excited,  tliat  he  felt  like  Hying  up 
to  the  clouds.6  The  emperor  Hsiao  ( 'It  eiiy "'  was  vory  fond  of  building 

1  In  tho  Sku-kinff,  iAL-fmng  Pt.V,  Bk.  XXVII,  f.  {Ugye.  Vol.  Ill,  I»t  II,  p.  .")'.)：{) 
King  Mu  uses  these  words  with  reference  to  Huang  Ti，  who  in  Uiis  manner  repre-SNed 
the  lawlessness  of  the  Miao-Ue. 

a  Hhu-king,  Yih-chi  Pt.  II,  Bk.  IV.  1. 

， Shu-—,  Wu-yi  Vl  V，  Bk.  XV,  13  (Ug9f  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II,  p.  471). 
*  Hsiao  Wu—  Han  Wu  Ti,  140- 80  b.c. 
5  A  distinguished  scholar  and  poet. 

8  The  emperor  Han  Wu  Ti  was  infatuated  with  alcliemy,  and  the  magical  arts 
taught  by  the  Taoists. 

7  Hsiao  <ltm9  二  Han  Ti,  32  (；  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


124 


Lnn-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


big  palaces.  Yang  Tse  Yiln  '  oflered  him  a  hymn  on  the  Kan-cltilati 
palace,2  which  he  extolled  as  something  supernatural,  as  if  he  were 
saying  that  human  force  could  not  achieve  such  a  work,  and  tliat 
spirits  must  have  lent  tlieir  aid.  Hsiao  Ch  4ng^  without  knowing 
it,  was  induced  thereby  to  go  on  building.  If  Sse  Ma  Hsiang  Ju  in 
his  poem  spoke  of  immortals,  lie  had  no  proof  for  it,  and,  if  Yang 
Tse  Yiln  wrote  a  panegyric  on  extravagance,  lie  did  the  emperor  a 
bad  service.  How  could  Fhitw  Wn  have  the  feeling  of  flying,  and 
how  could  Hsiao  Ch  ^ng  be  under  a  delusion  without  knowing  it? 
If  Heaven  does  not  use  another  fluid  to  reprimand  the  sovereign, 
ou  the  contrary  meets  his  wishes,  and  responds  to  liim  with  evil, 
he  acts  like  the  two  scholars,  who  imposed  upon  the  two  emperors 
by  their  poetry  so,  that  their  conscience  was  not  roused. 

Ton  Yiny  and  Kuan  Fu  3  were  so  disgusted  with  the  \vicke<lnes8 
of  the  time,  that  every  day  they  mutually  pulled  a  string  to  fasten 
their  hearts.  Their  disgust  was  such,  that  they  would,  on  no  account, 
have  yielded  to  their  desires.  /V  taught  the  Wu s  to  wear  a 

cap  and  a  girdle,  how  would  he  have  followed  their  customs,  and 
been  naked,  as  they  were?  Thus  tlie  Wu  learnt  propriety  and 
rigtheousness,  and  it  was  T'ai  Po  who  changed  their  customs.  Su 
H'm"  went  to  live  among  the  Ihiunymi.  but  he  never  buttoned  his 
coat  on  the  left  side.7  Chao  T  oB  lived  among  the  southern  Yfleh.9 
He  would  sit  down,  spreading  out  his  legs,  and  wear  his  hair  in 
a  tuft  upon  a  frame.  At  the  court  of  the  Han,  Su  Wu  was  prais- 
ed, and  Chao  T  o  blamed,  because  he  had  taken  to  the  uncivilised 
fashions  of  the  Yiirh,  abandoning  the  cap  and  the  girdle.  Lu  Chia  10 
spoke  to  him  about  the  costume  of  the  Chinese,  and  their  polished 

1  The  philosopher  Yang  Hniung,  a  philosopher  of  note  of  the  Coufucian  school, 

53  B.C.-  18  A.D. 

2  A  celebrated  palace  near  Hn-an-Ju  {(  liang-an)  originally  founded  by  (  h m 
Shih  Huang  Ti. 

3  Two  high  officers  of  the  2nd  cent.  b.c.    Cf.  chap.  XVIII. 

*  Cf.  p.  131. 

R  Aborigines  in  modern  Kiangm. 

c  In  KMJ  b.c.  Su  Wu  was  sent  as  enovy  to  the  Hmaiffnu,  who  kept  him 
prisoner  for  about  nineteen  years.  Though  the  H/iiungnu  made  every  endeavour  to 
win  liiru  over  to  their  cause,  lie  never  threw  off  his  allegiauco  to  the  Han,  where- 
fore he  is  praised  as  a  paragon  of  loyalty. 

7  Only  a  barbarian  would  button  liis  coat  on  the  left  side,  a  Chinaman  will 
button  it  on  the  right. 

*  A  famous  general  of  the  2nd  cent,  b.c,  who  subjugated  the  southern  bar- 
barians, and  subsequently  became  their  king.   (Cf.  chap.  XXXL) 

0  Aborigines  in  Canton  proviuce. 
10  Cf.  chap.  XXXL 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Reprimands. 


125 


manners,  and  held  up  their  morality  to  liira.  Chw  To  felt  remorse, 
and  turned  his  heart  back  to  his  native  land.  Had  Lu  Chia  again 
used  the  dress  of  the  Yileh,  and  their  barbarian  language,  and  follow- 
ed their  wild  customs,  how  could  he  have  caused  C/uio  To  to  feel 
remorse,  to  reform,  and  to  adopt  again  the  rules  of  Han.  A  diver- 
gence of  government,  and  culture  necessitates  the  use  of  different 
language,  and  different  arguments.  If  a  bad  ^overuuient  be  not 
transformed,  it  «;oes  on  as  before. 

In  case  that  a  sovereign  be  reprimanded  for  a  mistake,  but 
that  his  bad  government  be  not  changed,  and  his  wrong  continued, 
why  is  the  advice  given  him  as  a  reproof  not  heeded ？— When 
Kuan  S/iu  Ih'ien  and  T  sai  Shu  Tu  1  were  revolting.  Chou  Kuny  remon- 
strated with  them  several  times.  Did  lie  tell  tliem  that  they  should 
revolt,  when  lie  {idmonislied  them  ？ 

It  is  human  law  to  like  good,  and  liate  evil,  to  do  good  as 
reward,  and  to  inflict  evil  as  punishment.  The  law  of  Heaven  must 
he  the  same.  Now.  if  rewards  and  punishments  be  not  metetl  out 
in  the  proper  way,  tliere  is  evil.  Should  the  fluid  of  evil  respond 
to  it.  the  principle  of  hating  the  evil  would  nut  be  preserved. 

The  Han  improved  the  punishments  for  the  hiding  of  crimin- 
als.- and  fixed  penalties  for  the  asaistance  given  to  accomplices  to 
make  their  escape.  They  were  indignant  that  the  criiniuals  found 
helpers,  and  that  bands  were  organised.  By  restraining  tlie  prison- 
ers, when  they  were  taken  before  the  magistrates,  and  separating 
them  from  bad  characters,  keeping  tliein  in  different  places,  the  law 
concerning  the  hiding  of  criminals,  and  the  absconding  of  tlie  accom- 
plices might  have  been  dispensed  with. 

Ti  Ya  knew  how  to  give  the  right  flavour  to  wliat  lie  was 
cooking.  When  it  was  too  sour,  lie  poured  water  in.  and,  when 
it  was  tasteless,  lie  added  salt.  Water  and  fire  mixing  and  trans- 
forming one  another,  the  foo<l  beoam«»  niMther  too  salty,  nor  too 
tasteless.   Now.  if  in  c&»e  of  improper  rewarding  or  punishing  the 


' Two  brothers  of  ("hou  Kupg  and  of  Wu  Wang,  who  attempted  to  deprive 
their  nephew  ( h't'ny  Wang  of  the  throne,  but  their  rebellion  was  put  down  by 
t  'hou  Kung. 

2  A  uew  law  was  enacted  in  the  4th  year  of  tlie  Emperor  Hmnn  Ti  (7<  t  a.d.), 
by  which  descendants  conceal uig  their  ascendants,  mid  wives  hiding  their  husbands 
guilty  of  a  crime,  were  to  be  acquitted,  whereas  as.cml.ints  and  husbands  doing  the 
same  for  their  sous  and  wives,  had  to  sufTcr  capital  punishment.  Descendants  were 
no  doubt  under  a  mofal  obligation  to  help  their  asceiidants  under  any  circumstances, 
but  the  same  moral  law  did  not  exist  for  ucendants  towards  their  sons.  (Cf.  (  h  ten 
Han-thu  chap.  8  p.  11.) 


Digitized  by  Google 


126 


Lun-Hrng:  R.  Metaphysirjil. 


fault  is  not  made  good  by  anotln*r  fluid,  fold  being  still  added  to 
cold,  and  heat  to  heat,  this  would  be  like  finding  a  food  too  sour, 
and  adding  salt,  or  thinking  if  too  insipid,  ami  pouring  water  in. 
H«'iuc,  are  then-  not  serious  doubts  about  the  alleged  reprimands 
of  Heav«M),  or  must  \vc  bolieve  in  them? 

When  by  burning  fuel  one  licnts  a  i-auklron.  the  water  in  it 
boils,  ii"  the  firo  is  strong,  but  it  n'liiains  cool,  if  the  fin*  is  weak. 
Govcrnincnt  is  like  H"'  Hrr,  and  cold  like  boiling:  and  coolness. 
Speaking  of  the  govcrmnciit  of  a  sovereign.  、vt、  may  say  that  lie 
tloi\s  not  k «»<•[)  the  right  inodium  in  rowanliiii;  and  punishing,  but 
in  case  the  Yin  and  the  Y'wg  aro  in  disorder,  and  the  fluids  not 
in  harmony,  are  we  .justified  in  sayina;  that  ITcavrn  produces 
Wat  or  cold  for  tlie  sovercifiii's  sake  with  the  ol)ject  of  reprov- 
ing liim? 

The  xm-nittt  also  maintain  that,  wlien  tlie  administration  of  a 
sovor—i  is  bad.  Heaven  sends  extraordinary  events.  If  lie  docs 
not  clian<n\  HeaviMi  visits  liis  people  with  misfortunes,  and  if  he 
(loos  not  rof'onn  ,'ven  then,  it  visits  his  own  person.  That  is  to 
say: — first  extraordinary  events,  afterwards  calamities,  first  exhor- 
tations, then  punishments.  1  doubt  tin's  likewise.  If  one  plants 
something  iu  summer,  it  witliere,  and  does  not  grow,  and  if  one 
reaps  ,'oni  in  autumn,1  it  lies  about  and  oaunot  be  harvested.  Ad- 
ministration and  instruction  may  be  compared  to  planting  and  reap- 
ing. We  may  say  that  in  governing  the  rijfht  time  has  been  missed, 
but  c;in  \\  f  pretend  that,  in  case  of  disasters  caused  by  fluids  or 
other  things,  Ilea ven  lias  sent  extraordinary  events  to  reprimand 
tlit*  sovprei^n,  and  that,  becauso  the  latter  did  not  reform.  Heaven 
si'nt  down  misi'ortune  upon  him  in  order  to  slay  him  ？  These 
opinions  of  tlie  literati  are  those  of  illiterate  j)eoj»le. 

In  in  id-summer  tlie  Y""y  fluid  is  broiling  hot.  The  Yin  lluid 
rushes  against  it,  and  thero  is  a  hissing,  slionring  forlh.  and  crashing;. 
WIkmi  a  human  being  is  hit  by  it,  and  kilh  tl,  they  hold  that  Ileavi'ii 
has  |)unisliod  liim  for  liis  lii 山 sius.  To  a  sujn'rHi'ial  observer 
tiiis  may  seem  quite  likely,  but  in  reality  it  is  not  so.  First  they 
prett'nd  that  calamitous  events  ?erve  to  reprimand,  and  punish  a 
sovereign,  and  then  again  tliey  say  that  a  man  killed  by  a  thunder- 
stroko  is  punislicd  for  his  hidden  crimes, —a  wrong  statement,  and 
an  untenable  assertion  ！ 

Some  say  that  Ku  T"'  Yiin  in  a  memorial  to  tlie  cin|)eror  ex- 
plained rliat  ex  Ira  ordinary  pliciuuiK'na  were  visible  si<xns  of  Heaven's 

1  Which  begins  in  November. 


Digitized  by  Gc 


On  Reprimands. 


127 


reprimands,  which  would  be  repeated,  unless  a  cliang«4  took  place.1 
Tie  was  prepared  to  await  that  time  in  fetters.  Subsequently  they 
wore  repeated  in  fact.  Wliert'lorc  were  llicy  repeated,  provided 
that  they  were  not  meaut  as  r<'()riinai)(ls.'  For  tlit'st'  reasons  the 
\vonl.«s  of  Ku  7>  Yiin  were  later  on  ust'il  as  an  iiurtitive  to  reforms. 

Mv  reply  is  tliat  in  《'as,、  of  extraordinary  j»lienoinena  tho  Yin 
mid  the  Yaug  can  be  cU'tonnincd  beforehand.  The  fluiils  of  all 
things,  of  foureo,  have  their  b^innin^  and  their  end.  Walking  upon 
frost,  one  knows  tliat  liard  ice  will  ncressarily  follow.  That  is 
Heaven  s  law.  Kn  Tsc  Yiin  possessed  this  subtlo  knowledge,  and 
was  aware  of  what  subseijuoutly  was  Itountl  to  liappcn.  Therefore 
lie  borrowetl  the  theory  of  tlit*  phcnoniitialistM  to  corroboralo  his 
own  view.  Thus  lie  was  resolved  to  await  tin*  time  in  fitters. 
Just  like  Ytu  Tse  of  (  h  who  saw  the  *  Hook '  star3  bctwot'u 
tin*  t'onstcllations  of  tlin  '  House ' 4  and  tlie  '  Heart  '.5  In-  kiiew  that 
tliere  would  \w  an  t'artli-'iual"'.  Mad  Ku  Tsc  Yiin  seen  iho  '  Hook ' 
star,  lie  \voukl  again  liave  said  that  tlirougli  this  star  Heaven  ex- 
pressed its  displeasure,  and  that,  unloss  the  ijovfniuient  was  flian^cd, 
an  eartli-cjuake  would  lia[>{)en.  hi"  Tse  Yiin  was  looking  out  for  tlio 
time  to  t'ome  as  7:"'  HW"  did.  who  IV 11  down  oti  the  sti'ps  of  ll"' 
throne  to  await  that  the  planet  Mai、  should  shift  its  position,  an 
fvent  which  was  smv  to  take  placo.  1 1  cure  the  tlicory  of  re- 
primands was  believed.  If  、vt、  admit  it,  would  it  he  contrary  to 
justice,  or  injure  high  Heaven's  virtue?  Spontaneity  and  inaction 
、vould  be  humanised  thereby,  therefore  、v"  cannot  listen  to  it. 

By  credit ing  Moaven  with,  tlu*  power  of  iTprimanding-.  one 
extols  its  wisdom  in  investigating  the  truth.  However,  this  wisdom 
would  conflict  witli  Heaven's  rxccllt'in-e.  ••  How  do  we  know  that 
any  one  is  deaf? ― If  he  hears  distinctly. —  II(nv  (lo  we  know  tliat 
he  is  blind?— If  he  sees  clearly.  — How  do  \vc  know  that  lie  is 
mad.'  II'  lie  talks  properly." 7  Proper  talking,  and  cl,':ir  and  dist- 
inct hearing  and  s«»ei»^  is  what  the  Taoist  school  rails  madness, 

1  In  34  o.r.  Ku  TV  】'tiw    ：  Ku  Yung  attributed  mi  fr!i]).se  and  an  cartli-quake 
to  the  excessive  favour  shown  by  the  oiiipcror  to  the  ladies  of  his  soraglio.  He 
wrote  many  memorials  against  the  aliases  of  the  palarc. 
Cf.  p.  121. 

3  Tlie  planet  Mercury. 

*  The  stars  Beta,  Delta,  Pi,  and  Nun,  in  tlie  head  of  Scorpio. 
、 Tlie  stars  Antarcs,  Sigma,  and  Tau，  in  tlx-  heart  of  Scorpio. 
r-  Ci.  p.  158. 

7  A  Taoist  rhyme,  (juoti'd  from  the  Lu-^hih - rh'itu - ch  in.    See  also  Huni 
ST*  XVII,  Iv:    "  He  who  hears  the  sounding  sound  is  deaf,  but  he  who  heaw  the 
soundless  sound  is  quick  at  hearing.-' 


Digitized  by  Google 


128 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


blindness,  ami  deafness. 1  Xow  to  speak  of  Heaven's  reprimanding 
would  therefore  be  tantamount  to  calling  it  mad,  blind,  and  deaf. 

The  Yi-king  says  that  the  great  wan  equals  Heaven  and  Earth 
in  virtue."  Therefore  T'ai  Poz  holds  tliat  Ilraven  does  uot  speak, 
but  that  its  law  is  ingrafted  in  the  hearts  of  the  wise.  Con- 
sequently, the  virtue  of  tlie  j^rcat  man  is  tlie  virtue  of  Heaven,  and 
the  words  of  the  wise  are  tlie  words  of  Heaven.  When  the  great  man 
reproves,  and  the  wise  rebuke,  it  is  Heaven  which  reprimands,  and  yet 
people  sec  its  reprimands  in  calamitous  events,  which  1  cannot  believe. 

In  the  text  of  tlie  Six  Classics4  and  in  tlie  discourses  of  the 
Sa^es  every  now  aud  then  Heaven  is  refernnl  to,  because  they 
intend  to  reform  tlie  lawless,  and  to  frighten  tlu*  ignorant.  They 
wisli  to  make  it  understood  that  what  they  say  is  not  only  their 
private  opinion,  but  that  it  is  Heaven's  thought  also.  They  speak 
of  Heaven,  as  if  they  were  dealing  with  a  human  heart,  for  it  is 
not  the  blue  eiupyreau  wliicb  tliey  have  in  view.  The  phenomena- 
lists  hearing  the  unfounded  assertion  that  the  calamitous  events 
of  Heaven  always  happen  at  a  fixed  time,  have  therefrom  derived 
the  theory  of  repriraautls. 

The  past  affords  us  a  key  for  the  present.  Heaven  acts 
through  man  "  (S/mn)  received  ( Yao's)  abdication  from  the  Accrom- 
plislied  Ancestor."5  It  is  not  said  tliat  he  received  the  abdication 
from  Heaven.  From  Yao's  heart  we  learn  to  know  Heaven's  senti- 
ments. Yao  made  an  appoiutment,  and  Heaven  did  the  same,  and  all 
tlie  officials,  and  subjects  became  inclined  towards  Shut"  Shim  ap- 
pointed Yii,  aud  Yd  transmitted  the  sway  to  Ch  i.  In  all  these  cases  we 
learn  1'rom  the  human  heart,  wliat  Heaven's  feelings  were  like.  As  re- 
gards the  "afiVctionate  looks"  of  the  Sfti-fcing*  and  tlie  "mighty  angor"  iu 
the  Hung- fan,'  the  human  body  serves  to  exemplify  HeavtMi's  feelings. 


1  The  Taoists  despise  the  natural  organs: ― the  eye,  the  ear,  the  mouth,  and 
pretend  to  see  with  a  spiritual  eye,  to  lieaj-  with  a  spiritual  ear,  etc 
， Yi-kir^f,  1st  diagram  (Ch'ien). 
， The 鹏 of  Tan-fu  (cf.  p.  120). 

4  We  now  speak  of  the  Five  Classics  ： ―  Yi-kmg,  Shu-kmg,  Sfu-king,  LUci,  and 
Ch'un-ch'ht.  During  the  Han  period  the  "  Book  of  Music  '  was  added,  ranking  as 
the  fifth  Classic  before  the  ( 'h'un-ch'iu. 

'-' Shu-kinff,  S/iun-hen  Pt.  II，  Bk  I,  2  {Legge,  Vol.  Ul,  I't.  I,  p.  32)  According 
to  tlio  coiiiinontators  thia  passage  means  that  Shun  received  the  empire  from  Vuo 
before  the  hlirine  of  the  latter' s  ancestor,  wlio  llius  might  be  regarded  m  the  donor. 
Vid.  j).  134. 

: Wc  read  in  the  Sh，i-kiiuj,  Iluny-f'tn  Pt.  V,  Bk.  IV.  3  [Legge,  Vol.  111.  Pt.  II, 
p.  ii'ili)  "  K  'un  duiimicd  up  the  inuudatin^  waters,  and  thereby  threw  into  disorder 
the  aiT.-u)gemem  of  the  live  cleinenus.    i>od  wan  thereby  roused  to  auger." 


Digitized  by 


On  Reprimands.  1 20 

When  King  WM  and  King  Wu  had  died.  King  Cit  ing  was 
still  an  infant,  and  the  institutions  of  the  Chou  dynasty  were  not 
yet  completed.  Tlie  duke  of  Chou  acted  a«  lord  protector,  hut  there 
was  no  special  instruction  from  Heaven.  The  duke  of  Chou  asked 
his  own  heart,  and  conformed  to  the  intentions  of  Heaven. 

The  heart  of  high  Heaven  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Sages. 
When  Ht'aven  reprimands,  it  is  done  through  the  moutlis  of  the 
Sa^e8.  Yet  people  do  not  believe  tlie  words  of  tlie  Sagos.  They 
trust  iti  the  fluid  of  calamitous  events,  and  strive  to  make  ont 
Heaven '8  meaning  therefrom.  W \\y  go  so  far?  Hut,  should  there  he 
no  sa^es  during  a  generation,  wlierc  are  their  、voi'(b  to  come  from  ？ ― 
Wise  men,  whose  talents  are  almost  up  to  the  mark,  rank  《*losely 
after  the  Sages. 


Lim-lli-iii;. 


'J 


Digitized  by  Google 


130 


Lun-Hrng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
Heaven's  Original  Gift  (Ch'u-pitig). 

A  man  predestinated  at  his  birtli  for  wealth  and  honour,  is 
imbued  with  the  spontaneous  lluid  from  the  beginuing.  After  he 
has  been  brought  up,  and  grown  to  manhood,  liis  lucky  fate  mani- 
fests itself. 

WVn  Wanf/  received  a  scarlet  bird,  Wn  Wang,  a  white  fish  and 
a  red  crow.1  The  scholars  are  of  opinion  that  with  the  bird 
Heaven's  decree  was  transmitted  to  UV//  Wang,  which  in  the  case 
of  \Yu  Wany  was  done  by  the  fish  auil  the  crow.  Thus  Win  Wang 
and  Vl'«  Wang  would  have  received  thfir  fate  from  Heaven,  which 
used  tlie  bird,  the  fish,  and  the  cmw  to  pass  it  on  to  them.  Heaven 
use«l  a  scarlet  bird  to  invest  Wen  Wang,  but  Wen  Waug  did  not  re- 
ceive the  mandate  of  Heaven.2  Thou  Heaven  took  a  fish  and  a 
crow,  and  enfeolftMl  \Yu  Wang.  This  would  imply  that  primarily 
the  two  received  no  fate  from  above,  and  that  it  was  not  before 
they  purified  themselves,  and  did  good,  and  the  news  lljereof 
reached  Heaven,  that  Heaven  endowed  tlicin  with  imperial  honours. 
The  bird,  the  (ish,  and  tlu'  crow  would  then  be  heavenly  messengers 
carrying  the  investiture,  which  emperors  must  have  received  to 
have  the  po、vt*r  over  life  ami  death.  However,  a  thorough  investi- 
gation shows  us  that  fate  lias  nothing  to  do  with  these  cast's. 

Fate  is  what  comes  over  people  at  the  bt'fpnning,  wlien  they 
are  created.  They  then  receive  their  mind  as  well  as  tlieir  fate. 
Mind  and  fate  come  together  and  at  the  same  time.  The  mind 
does  not  pivmle,  or  fate  follow.    How  can  this  bo  uia<le  clear? 

CI  I  P  served  under  Yuo  as  territorial  olfioial,  became  super- 
intendant  of  agriculture,  and  therefrom  re eiv»»d  tlie  title  of  Lord 
of  Agriculiure  {lion  Clu).  His  grfat-grandson  Duke  Liu  lived  at  T  ai, 
but  later  on  moved  to  Hn*   His  g rea t -g reat -gra n d son  Tan  Fu,  the 

， Cf.  Shi-chi,  chap.  4  p.  S  (( 'htrannrf,  Mm,.  JUst.  Vol.  I，  p.  216  Note  1 ,  and  p.  226). 
2   Wrn  Waruf  did  not  yet  attain  the  imperial  dignity,  which  subsequently  de- 
volved upon  his  son,  Wu  Wanij. 

， The  ancestor  of  the  ( 'hou  dynaaty. 

*  T  ai  and  Pin  were  botli  situated  in  Shensi. 


Heaven  s  Original  Gift. 


131 


"OUl  Duke "  had  three  sons:— '/'  "，•  Po,  (1,'vng  Yung  and  Chi  Li 
The  son  of  Chi  Li  was  (  liang,  the  later  Wdn  Wang.  When  he  was 
still  in  his  swaddling  clothes,  there  appeared  portents  indio-ativc  of 
his  holiness.  Therefore  Tan  Fa  said ： ― "It  is  through  Chang  that 
my  family  will  become  illustrious."  W  Ihmi  T  al  /V  heard  of  it, 
he  retired  to  H'm,2  tattooed  himself,  and  <-ut  his  hair  in  order  to 
make  room  for  Chi  Li.  W'M  Wmitj  is  believed  to  have  met  with  his 
fate  at  that  period.  Yft  Heaven's  fate  is  alrradv  at  work, 
mail  conies  into  being.  Tan  Fu,  the  Old  Duke,  found  it  out  very 
soon,  but  it  、vas  already  there,  before  Wen  Wang  was  even  con- 
ceived by  his  raotlxT.  The  fate  which  emperors  acquire  becomes 
their  mind  internally  and  their  body  externally.  T"  the  body 
belong  tlie  features  and  the  osseous  structure,  which  man  gets  at 
his  birth. 

Officials  with  a  yearly  income  of  more  than  a  hundre<l  pit'uls, 
but  of  a  lower  rank  tlian  jirince.s  and  counts,  suoli  as  /"〃y-f/"'m '夕, 3 
la-fit,  and  yuaii-shifi,*  or  provincial  ofT'cials  like  inteiutants  ami  pre- 
fects, in  short,  all  salaried  functionaries  have  obtained  a  late  pre- 
destinating ( hem  for  wealth  and  honour,  whicli  after  their  birth  is 
apparent  in  their  faces.  / l^il  Fu  and  Ku  f*ii  '/:、'<?  ('I,  iug  perceivefl 
these  signs.5  Officials  rise  in  oflico,  some  to  the  ranks  of  lords 
and  ministers.  Tliey  are  predestinated  to  grandeur  and  a  very 
exalted  position.  An  emperor  possesses  the  highest  dignity,  and 
liis  rank  is  the  most  exaltod.  At  his  birtli,  lio  is  endowed  with  a 
glorious  fate,  and  liis  body  shows  peculiar  signs  of  nobility  at  that 
time.  The  "  Old  Duke  "  was  well  aware  of  this,  when  he  beheld 
the  remarkable  four  nipples,"  lor  tlit'st*  lour  nipples  were  the  marks 
of  a  Sago.  Win  Wang  received  the  lieavenly  decree  making  liim  a 
sa«e,  when  he  was  still  in  his  mother's  、vouib，  or  did  the  four 
uipples  grow  only,  after  he  had  become  a  man,  ami  practised  virtue? 

1  The  Shi-c/u  chap.  4  p.  4  relates   thnt  Po  ns  well  us  (  h  ttng  Yung, 

whom  the  Shi-chi  styles  ) «  ( 'h  ung,  retired  to  the  barbarians  out  of  regard  for  tlieir 
ymnger  brother  ('hi  Li. 

%  The  kingdom  of  V\'«,  the  modern  province  of  Kiangsu,  at  that  time  .still 
inhabited  by  aborigines,  hence  tlte  tattooing. 

3  Chamberlains  of  the  Palace  Guard. 

1  These  offices  are  mentioned  hy  Menciti^  Hk.V,  I't.  II,  rlmp.  *2.  who  informs 
us  that  a  chief  minister  had  four  times  as  much  income  as  a  tn-fu,  and  a  Ui-Ju 
twice  as  much  as  a  yaan-fhih.  I^gyf  tninslatcs  "  great  oiTwvr "  and  "  scholar  of 
the  first  class,"  wliicli  does  not  say  niueh.  I  would  like  to  say  "  Direi  tor  of  a  De- 
partment " and  "  First  Clerk." 

s  Two  renowned  physiognomists,  cf.  chap.  XXIV. 

c  A  peculiarity  of  Wm  Wuny,  t'l:  cliap.  XXIV.  • 


Digitized  by  Google 


132 


Lun -Hong:  B.  Metaphysical. 


As  regards  tlie  four  nipples,  we  know  also  that  lambs  have  them 
already  ay  embryos.  Dame  Liu  sleeping  by  a  big  lake  dreamt 
that  she  met  witli  a  gonitis,  and  tliereupon  ^avc  hirth  to  Kfto-Tsn. 1 
At  that  time,  lie  ha<l  already  o!)taiiu*d  his  fate:  When  Kunuy  H>/2 
was  born  in  the  Chi-yang  palace,  a  brilliant  light  shone  in  tho  room 
at  midnight,  thougli  there  was  no  fire.  One  of  the  soldiers 
Yung  sa id  to  the  secretary  Ch  ung  Imii'.  —  "  This  is  a  lucky  thing," 
and  nothing  more.3  At  that  time  Kuawj  W'u  had  already  got  his 
destiny.  The  assertion  that  Wen  Woihj  and  Wn  Wmuj  received 
Heaven's  decree  togetlier  \\\\\\  the  scarlet  bird,  the  iish,  and  the 
crow  is,  therefore,  erroneous.  Heaven's  order  once  being  issued, 
an  emperor  arises,  and  there  is  no  further  need  for  another  decree. 

Favoured  with  a  l'at»»  conferring  the  highest  distinctions  upon 
tliein,  emperors  are  horn  a«  a  matter  of  course,  as  will  be  seen 
I'roin  tlie  follow  ing:  -Old  men  of  wealthy  families  hoard  up  thou- 
sands of  c/i/n.*  J'hcy  coint*  into  the  world  with  the  physiognomies 
of  ricli  men.  Th»iv  work,  and  product1,  and  amass  wealth,  until, 
in  rlieir  old  ago,  they  have  become  ricli  old  folks  Emperore  are 
the  old  nu'ti  iu  possi'ssion  ol'  tlie  empire.  Their  fate  is  inherent  to 
tl"、ir  bodies,  precisely  as  with  birds  the  distinction  between  cocks 
and  liens  exists  already  in  the  eirjj-sliell.  When  the  eggs  are 
hatched,  cocks  and  liens  creep  out.  After  days  and  months  their 
bones  wax  stronger,  and  at  last  the  cocks  jiair  with  the  hens  quite 
of  their  own  accord.  Tlicv  are  not  taught  to  do  so,  after  they 
have  grown  up  so,  tliat  rhev  would  dare  to  pair  only  then.  This 
is  a  spontaneous  act,  after  their  constitution  lias  been  strengthened. 
Now  emperors  arc  the  corks  in  tlie  empire.  Tliey  are  destined  to 
become  eniperoi-s.  Tliis,  their  destiny  comes  down  upon  thein,  wlien 
they  are  still  in  an  embryonic  state  in  the  same  luaanpr,  as  the 
l'uture  grandees  get  their  peculiar  physiognomies,  which  tliey  possess 
at  their  birth,  and  as  tlie  cocks  are  formed  in  the  egg. 

This  is  not  only  true  of  men  aud  birds,  but  of  all  organisms. 
Plants  trees  grow  from  seeds.  Tliey  pierce  tlie  earth  as  sprouts, 
by  their  furtlu-r  growth  stem  arid  leaves  are  formed.  Their  length 
and  coarseness  are  developed  from  tlie  seeds.  Emperors  are  the 
acme  of  greatness.  The  stalk  of  tlie  "  vermilion  grass  "  is  like  a 
needle,  tlie  sapling  of  the  "  purple  boletus "  like  a  bean.  Iioth 


' See  p.  177. 

2  The  first  emperor  of  the  Later  flnn  Dynasty,  25— iS8  a.i>. 
" Cf.  p.  180. 

*  Old  coins. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Heaven's  Original  Gift. 


plants  are  auspicious.  There  is  something  auspicious  about 
••mperors  also,  wlio  come  into  existence,  endowed  with  the  hea- 
venly fluid. 

Some  people  believe  that  emperors  have  receivod  Heaven's 
decree,  wlien  they  are  born,  but  tliat  Heaven  invests  them  a^ain, 
wlien  they  assume  the  supreme  power,  .just  as  lords,  ministers,  and 
tlie  lower  grades  await  the  imperial  brevet,  before  tlioy  dare  to 
take  charge  of  their  post,  and  that  the  scarlet  bird,  the  iish.  and 
the  crow  were  emblems  of  the  iuvestitun*  hv  august  Heaven.  That 
would  mean  that  human  alFairs  are  ordered  and  n^ulated  by 
Hoaveo's  interference,  whereas  spontaiifity  and  inaction  are  the 
principles  of  Heaven.  To  enfeoff  Whi  Wang  by  mcaiis  of  a  scarlet 
bird,  and  Wit  Wang  through  a  white  fisli,  would  be  on  purpose. 

Kuan  Chung  dividetl  gain  with  Va*>  S/m  1  and  ap[)ortioncd  more 
to  himself.2  Pao  Shu  did  not  give  it  him,  atul  he  did  not  a^k  for 
it.3  That  is,  they  knew  each  other,  one  regarded  the  other  as  h'\» 
own  self,  ami  had  no  scruples  about  taking  anything  for  himself. 
A  Sage  takes  the  empire,  as  A uan  ('lumy  the  property.4  Amongst 
friends  their  is  no  question  about  giving  or  taking.  August  Heaven 
is  spontaneous.5  If  it  really  issued  orders,  then  its  principle 
would  be  purpose,  whereas  friendship  is  spontaneous. 

When  Han  h'ao  Tm  slew  the  big  snake,"  who  prompted  him 
to  do  so?  Did  an  order  from  Heaven  arrive  first,  which  encouraged 
him  to  do  the  deed?  It  was  an  outburst  of  his  valour,  a  spontaneous 
impulse.  The  slaying  of  the  big  snake,  the  destruction  of  Ch  in,1 
ami  the  killing  of  Usinng  Ffi,8  all  amount  to  same.  That  the 
two  Chou  emperurs  Wdn  Wany  and  \Yu  Wang  iv(，《'ive(l  Heaven's  de- 
cree, and  defeated  the  Yin  dynasty,  must  be  imderstootl  in  the 

1  Kttan  Chung  and  Pao  Shu  Ya  lived  in  the  Hth  cent.  B.r.  They  were  in- 
timate friends,  and  arc  the  Chinese  Dutnua  and  Pythias. 

， The  Shi-chi  chap.  <>2  \i.  lv,  Biography  of  A'uan  (  hung,  states  that  Kuan 
Vkuny  cheated  his  friend.  He  there  admits  himself  that  in  doing  business  with 
Pao  Shu  Ya,  lie  took  more  than  his  share  of  tlie  gain,  but  thai  he  did  it,  because 
he  wa«  very  poor,  and  not  oat  of  greed. 

3  Kuan  (  hung  took  more  tliati  his  share  not  on  purpo.s*,  out  of  greed,  but 
uiiintentiotially. 

*  The  empire  falls  to  the  share  of  the  Sage,  he  takes  it  as  a  matter  of 
course,  but  does  not  long  for  it. 

*  His  actions  are  like  tliose  of  intimate  friends:  natural,  unpremeditated,  and 
sijontaneous. 

0  This  iticident  is  told  more  fully  on  p.  17S. 

7  The  imperial  house  of  ( 'h'in,  which  wa*  dethroned  by         Kno  Tm, 
s  thiang  )'u  committed  suicide,  when  defeated  by  //an  Kao  Tm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


134 


Lun  -  Hi'ng:  I>.  Mctaplivsu-al. 


same  sense.  If  Kao  Tsn  took  the  reins  of  government  without  a 
special  order,  it  cannot  be  truo  that  H'V"  Wang  and  \Yu  Waug  alone 
were  invrst<*<!  through  a  bird  and  a  fish. 

The  "b,j,'('f"">n  may  be  raised  that  in  the  "  Announcement  to 
K  n»g  S/hi  "  it  is  stated  that  ： ― "  (;oil  heard  of  it,  and  was  pleaserL 
and  I  leaven  gavt、  HV"  Wan;/  a  great  cliar^e."'  If  sucli  a  decree 
were  impossible,  how  could  the  Annals  and  Classics  spoak  of  a 
great  command  given  l)y  I  leaven  to  WVn  11>〃' 〃？一 The  expression 
great  ooiumand  does  not  signify  tliat  Heaven  issued  orders  to  Wen 
Woikj.  Whatever  a  Sa^e  does,  he  t'ullills  the  ooimnauds  of  Heaven. 
Ih»  agrees  with  Heaven,  a.s  il'  lie  had  done  what  Heaven  bade  him. 
In  t  lie  S/iu-king  K  <ni<j  -Situ  is  just  admonished  and  exliorted  to  do 
good,  therefore  it  is  mentioned  that  Heaven  above  heard  of  Wen 
Wang  s  good  deeds,  and  (hcroupon  gave  him  a  great  cliarge. 

I'lie  Shi-king  says:-  "  (God)  sent  liis  kind  regards  round  to 
the  west,  and  then  ve  an  tibode."*-  Tins  is  the  same  idea. 
IIea\  en  has  no  head  and  no  lace,  how  could  .it  look  about.  Man 
can  look  around.  l【mtmn  qualities  have  been  ascribed  to  Heaven. 
It  is  t'asy  to  see  that.  Tlius  one  speaks  of  looking  about.  Heaven's 
com  in  and  given  to  WM  and  liis  looking  are  vory  inurli  the 

«{ime.  In  reality  Heaven  »ives  no  orders,  whicli  can  be  provoil  in 
this  way  ： ― 

" The  |)erl'rct  man  rt'sembles  Heaven  and  Kartli  in  virtue, 
stin  and  moon  in  Ijrightness,  tin*  four  seasons  in  regularity,  and 
"hosts  and  spirits  with  regard  to  lucky  and  unlucky  omens.  When 
lie  acts  lirst,  Heaven  does  not  disagree  with  liiin,  and,  when  he 
follows  Heaven,  he  con  forms  to  his  periods."3 

It*  in  order  to  act  there  would  always  be  a  decree  of  lle«iven 
required,  how  could  there  be  actions  preceding  that  ol*  Heaven, 
and  others  following  it.  Since  the  Sage  acts,  without  waiting  for 
Heaven's  decree,  just  on  the  impulse  of  his  heart,  sometimes  he 
lakes  tlic  initiative,  sometimes  lie  follows  Heaven,  which  means 
that  he  is  always  in  harmony  with  Heaven's  periods.  Hence  it  is  said 
that  Heavt'ii  iloes  not  disagive,  and  that  the  Sape  conforms  to  Heaven. 

Tlie  Analects*  say:—"  Great  is  Yno  as  a  sovereign ！  Heaven  is 
great,  and  Yao  correspoiulfd  to   him."    Emperors  (； orreapond  to 

1  SUn-kiny  Pt.  V,  Book  IX,  4. 

a  Shi-hiu,  Pt.  Ill,  Book  I,  Ode  VII,  1. 

J  Quotation  from  the  )  i-king,  ( 'h  ten  liexagram  (N.  I).  The  eommentiitor 
says  that  tlie  Sa<x«'  au<l  Heu\  en  arc  always  in  accordanoc.  no  matter  who  acta  tirst, 
because  thev  both  Ibilow  tlie  siime  principles. 

' A,',u/nL->  VU1,  12. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Heaven's  Originnl  Oifi. 


1.'i5 


Heaven,  that  is,  to  say,  they  are  not  in  opposition  to,  and  obey 
Iloavt* n.  Bringing  the  spontaneous  nature  into  liarmony  with  Heaven, 
that  is  tlie  meaning  of  tin*  <>;rcat  coinniatid  given  to  Wen  Wang.  Wen 
Wony  had  his  own  ideas,  and  acted  by  himself.  Ho  was  not  driven 
on  by  Heaven,  nor  was  the  scarlet  bird  commissioned  to  tell  him 
that  he  should  be  ciTiperor,  whereupon  lie  darerl  to  assume  the 
imperial  sway.    W^u  Wang's  scarlet  bird  and  Wu  wliito  iish 

were  not  messengers  bringing  the  assurance  of  Heaven's  glorious  lu-lp. 

Whatever  a  lucky  man  begins,  turns  to  liis  advantage.  He 
finds  adherents  without  seeking  them,  and  auspicious  objects  without 
taking  any  trouble  to  get  them.  A  latent  sympathy  pervades  all 
things.  If  lie  be  induced  to  come  forth,  aud  to  hear  and  look, 
and  he  then  sees  something  very  propitious,  it  is  mere  spontaneity. 
When  HV/»  Wmig  was  going  to  stand  ii|>  as  emperor,  the  scarlet 
bird  happened  to  appear.  The  fish  jumped  up,  and  the  bird  came 
flying,  and  Wu  Wat  if/  chanced  to  perceive  tl)eiu.'  It  was  not  Heaven 
wliich  sent  the  birds  and  the  white  lish.  The  lucky  objects  were 
moving  about,  and  (lie  Sages  met  them.  Of  the  white  fish  which 
jumped  into  the  Emperor's  boat,  Wang  Yang2  said  that  it  was  a 
chance.  At  the  time,  when  Lin  A'.'m,3  president  of  tlie  Banqueting 
Office,  waa  still  governor  of  lluny-nuny^  a  rigor  crossed  the  Yellow 
Kiver.  The  emperor  Kuany  Wu  Ti  said  that  it  was  nothing  but  a 
curious  coincidence,  and  a  spontaneous  art,  and  that  nobody  had 
sent  the  tiger.  What  Wany  Yang  called  a  chanft*  and  Kwuiy  Wu 
Ti  a  coincidence,  were  all,  so  to  speak,  instances  of  spontaneity. 

1  Shi-chi  chap.  4  |».  H. 

s  A  famous  teacher  and  in  later  years  a  tni[iist«r,  <>f  the  1st.  cent.  a.d. 

3  A  native  of  H'man,  died  57  b.'、.   ( iilen,  Biogr.  Diet.  N.  1323. 

4  A  city  in  Honan. 


―.'  _4  Digitized  by  Google 


)36 


I.uii-ll«'ii^:  B.  Mctai'li〉、i<'al. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
What  is  meant  by  Destiny?  {Miny-yi) 

The  MAhists1  hold  that  man's  (loath  is  not  predestinated,  whereas 
the  Confucianists  are  of  opinion  tliat  it  is.  The  believers  in  Destiny 
rely  on  the  authority  of  '/:、•''  〃.、-'." 2  who  says,  "  Life  and  death 
(lejxMul  on  Destiny,  wcaltli  and  liommr  come  from  Heaven."3  Those 
who  (1,'ny  the  existence  of  Destiny  refer  to  tlie  city  of  Li-yang, 
wliich  sunk  into  a  lake  in  otio  nitrlit,  and  to  Po-Cli  i,  a  general  of 
Ch  in,  who  buried  alivi'  the  troops  of  ( 'hao  after  their  submission 
below  ('/,  "〃•？-//'•",/，&  altogether  400  000  men,  who  all  died  at  the 
same  time."  When  in  the  Ch'un-ch  iu  period7  armies  were  defeated, 
soinotiines,  thpy  say,  the  grass  wa«  liiddfin  by  thousands  of  dead 
bodies.  In  time  of  lamiiKN  all  the  roads  are  lull  of  starving  people. 
During;  epideinit-s  caused  l)y  malarial  exhalations,  thousands  of  fam- 
ilies are  extin*>uislHHl.  If  there  really  sliouUl  he  Destiny,  liow  is 
it,  they  ask.  that  in  ( '/<  in  alt  wore  involved  in  the  same  catastrophe? 

The  believers  in  Destiny  will  reply,  "  When  the  vastness  of 
the  earth,  and  the  great  number  of  its  inhabitants  is  taken  into 
account,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  ； it  that  the  people  at  Li-yang 
and  Ch  nng-j/  ing  should  equally  be  doomed  to  die.  Those  whose 
destiny  it  was  to  be  drowned,  assembled  at  Li-yang^  and  those 
who  were  to  be  crushed  to  dcatli,  came  together  at  Ch  atuf~p  ing 
for  that  purpose." ― 

When  Han  Kao  Tsu 8  began  his  career,  a  fortune-teller,  who 
t*m t» red  tlie  t, 、！ ritory  of  h^ng  and  /*  fi,  found  many  persons  who 
were  made  counts  afterwards.  But  not  all  the  old  and  young  people, 
mtMi  and  women  \mro  tlie  mark  of  nobility.    As  a  rule  exceptional 

1  The  followers  of  Mr  Ti. 

2  A  disciple  of  (  on/uciujt. 
5  Analects  XII,  *). 

*  A  city  in  Ankui. 
-' A  oitv  in  NA/j/wn". 

" This  massacre  took  place  in  2»)0  n.r.  (Cf.  Mayem  Render  x  Manual  N.  514.) 
7  722-4S!  b.c. 

14  The  founder  of  the  former  dynasty,  a  native  of  V  ei  in  Kiungsu.  F"vj 
was  another  region  in  tlie  neiglihourliaod. 


^|  Digitized  by  Google 


What  is  meant  by  DeHtiny? 


137 


persons  arc  met  with  occasionally  only.  Yet  at  Li-ynng  men  and 
women  were  all  drowned,  and  at  (  h  ""•'/  p  iny  the  aged  and  the 
young  were  buried  to  the  last.  Among  tens  of  thousands  there 
were  oertainly  many  who  had  still  a  long  life  before  them,  and 
ought  not  to  have  died.  But  such  as  happen  to  live  in  a  time  of 
decay,  wImui  war  breaks  out  everywhere,  caimot  terminate  their 
long  lives.  The  span  allotted  to  men  is  long  or  short,  and  their 
age  rtourisliing  or  eflV"'.  Sickness,  disasters,  and  misfortunes  are 
signs  of  decay.  Tlu*  States  of  Sung,  Wei,  Ch  ^n,  and  Cheng  were 
all  visi"'(l  with  firo  on  the  same  day. 1  Among  tho  people  of*  the 
four  kingdoms  were  certainly  not  a  few  whose  prosperity  was  still 
at  its  height,  and  who  ought  not  to  have  been  destroyed.  Nevcr- 
thclesss  tlicv  all  liad  to  suflVr  I'rom  the  conflagration,  being  involved 
in  their  country's  doom,  for  tlie  destiny  of  a  State  is  stronger  than 
tfiat  of  individuals. 

Tlie  destiny  regulating  man's  life-time  is  more  powerful  than 
tho  one  presiding  over  his  prosperity.  Man  shows  by  Ins  appear- 
ance, whether  he  will  die  old  or  voting,  and  there  are  signs  in- 
dicatiu^,  whether  he  will  be  ricli  or  poor,  hi«;li-plared  or  base.  All 
this  is  to  be  seen  from  his  body.  T>cngth  and  shortness  of  life 
are  gifts  of  Heaven.  Whctlier  the  structure  of  the  hones  be  good 
or  had.  is  visible  in  the  body.  If  a  man's  lite  must  be  cut  off  in 
its  prime,  he  cannrtt  live  long,  although  lie  be  endowed  with  extra- 
ordinary qualities,  and  if  it  he  decrce(l  that  lie  shall  he  poor  and 
miserable,  the  very  ln'st  character  is  of  no  .avail  to  liim. ― When 
/ isiang  Yfi 2  was  going  to  die,  lie  turned  to  his  followers,  and  said, 
" I  am  vanquished,  but  by  fate,  not  l)y  farce  of  arms."  This  is 
true,  for  in  warfare  Ihiwxj  Yn  was  superior  to  Kno  7>«.  The  latter' s 
rise  was  due  to  Heaven's  decree  only. 

The  destiny  of  tlie  State  is  connected  with  the  stars.  Just 
as  their  <M)nstellations  are  propitious  or  un propitious,  the  State  is 
happy  or  urtliappy.  As  tlie  stars  revolve  and  wander,  men  rise 
ami  fall.  Human  prosperity  and  distress  are  like  the  abundance 
and  the  scarcity  ot  a  year.  Destiny  is  tluurishing  or  declining: 
things  are  eitlicr  expensive  or  cheap.  Within  the  space  <»f  one 
•year,  they  are  sometimes  expensive,  and  at  others  cheap,  as  during 

1  This  great  fire,  wliich  on  the  same  <lay  broke  out  in  tlie  capitals  of  the 
four  Suites,  is  recorded  in  the  ('hun-ch'iu  Book  X,  IS  (Duke 广 as  happening  in 
">20  ii.r.  It  is  believed  to  have  been  foreshadowed  by  a  comet,  wliich  appeared  in 
winter  of  the  preceding  year.— These  four  States  were  cuinprised  in  fio'""i,  ex- 
cept Sunff  which  occupied  the  tiDttlieru  part  ol  modern  Kiuriffm. 

1  The  rival  of  //""  huu  Tm,  bel'ure  the  latter  ascended  the  throne. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I.un-Il«'ng:  B  Meta|>li)sic;il. 


a  long  life  prosperity  and  distress  alternate.  Tlio  prices  of  things 
tlo  not  depend  on  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  the  year,  nor  is 
liuman  prosperity  the  outc<»inc  of  ability  or  ignorance. 

How  is  it  that  T,"'  says,  "  Life  and  death  depend  on 

Di'stiny,  wealth  and  lionour  come  {'mm  IIeav<»n  "  instead  oi*  saying, 
" Lite  and  (loath  come  from  Hoaven,1  wt'alth  and  honour  depend 
on  Destiny  ？  "  For  life  and  death  rlierc  a  re  no  heavenly  signs,  they 
depend  on  the  constitution.  Wlu'n  a  man  has  got  a  strong  con- 
stitution, his  vital  force  is  oxuberant,  and  liis  body  strong.  In 
case  of  bodily  stri'n^th  life's  destiny  is  lonj;:  the  lon«»;-liv»*tl  do  not 
die  young.  Conversely,  he  who  has  got  a  weak  constilution  pos- 
Hesst's  but  a  feeble  vital  force,  and  a  delicate  bodily  l'ra me.  Deli- 
<raey  is  the  cause  of  tl»e  shortness  of  life's  destiny;  the  short-lived 
die  early.  Const*(jueri(ly,  if  、vt'  say  that  there  is  a  dostiny,  destiny 
means  constitution. 

As  regards  tlie  transmission  of  wealth  and  honour,  it  is  like 
the  vital  foroe,  nc.  an  effluence  omiuiatiii^  from  tho  stars.  Their 
hosts  are  <m  heaven,  which  has  their  sii^ns.  Beinj^  born  under  a 
star  pointing  at  wealth  and  lionour,  man  obtains  wealth  and  honour, 
whereas  under  a  heavenly  sign  implying  poverty  and  misery,  he 
will  become  jxior  and  miseraMe.  Thus  wealtli  and  lionour  mine 
from  Heaven,  but  how  is  this  brought  about?  Heaven  has  its 
hundreds  of  officials2  and  multitudes  of  stars.  Just  as  Hoaven  emits 
its  fluid,  the  stars  scn<l  forth  their  efllm'ncr,  which  keeps  amidst 
the  hoavenly  lluid.  Ipibibing  this  (Uiid,  men  arc  born,  and  live,  as 
lonjr  as  thvy  l"'<'p  it.  If  they  obtain  a  tine  one,  they  becomo  men 
of  rank,  if  a  commoii  ono,  comnion  peoplo.  Their  position  may 
l)o  lii^luT  or  lo、vt'r,  and  thoir  wealth  big^or  or  smaller,  according 
a«  tlie  stars  distributing  all  this,  rank  higlior  or  lower,  are  larger 
or  smaller.— Heaven  has  many  hundml  officials  and  multitudes 
of  stars,  and  so  w  e  have  on  earth  the  ^ence  of  tens  of  thousands 
of  j)0opli',  of  the  Five  Kmporors  and  the  I'hrcc  Rulers.3  Heaven 
lias  his  Wang  Liang  and  Tmio  /'，'/.*  men  have  thtMii  also.  He  、vho 
is  endued  with  their  ossi-fice,  becomes  skilled  in  charioteering;. 

It  is  said  that  three  diflerent  kinds  of  destiny  can  be  dis- 
tinguished, the  naturnl.  the  voiicomUnnt.  and  the  fulverae  one.  One 

1   Wang  <  h'ung  puts  a  construction  npon  the  words  of  Tse  Usin,  of  which  he 
prohahly  never  thought.    T/te  Hntt  used  Destiny  and  Heaven  as  synonyms,  as  we  do. 
-' Namely  the  stars. 

s  The  first  legendary  rnlern  of  Chinese  history. 

4  Two  famous  chariowers  of  old,  the  latter  the  driver  of  the  eight  celebrated 
steeds  of  Kiag  Mu  of  thou. 


Digitized  by  Google 


What  is  meant  hy  Destiny  ？ 


139 


speaks  of  natural  destiny,  if  somebody's  lurk  is  the  simple  (！ onsr- 
quenoc  (if  liis  origiual  organisation.  His  constitution  being  well 
ordered,  and  his  bones  ifood,  Ik*  nvvds  not  toil  in  order  t,、  obtain 
happiness,  shiw  his  luck  '''iiii'-is  M'  its«»If.  This  is  meant  by  natural 
destiny.  Conconiirant  destiny  i-oinos  into  |>lay,  when  a  man  Irn'omrs 
happy  only  by  dint  <>f  liard  work,  but  is  pursurd  by  misiortune, 
as  soon  as  hv  yii'lds  to  liis  projHMisitivs.  ami  gives  roiti  to  his  desires. 
This  is  to  bv  im 山' rst("ul  by  conroinitant  destiny.  As  for  adverse 
destiny,  a  man  ma)',  contrary  to  his  cxi^'ctations,  n'ap  l)ad  fruits  froni 
all  liis  good  deeds:  lie  will  rush  into  misfortunf  and  misery,  which  will 
strike  him  from  afar.    Th('r«、for''.  one  can  spoak  oi"  adverse  destiny. 

Kv<iry  mortal  rm'ivt's  liis  own  destiny:  already  at  th<*  time 
of*  his  roiH'eption,  ht*  obtains  a  lucky  or  an  uiilut'ky  chance.  .Man's 
nature  does  not  correspond  to  his  destiny:  his  dispositiou  may  be 
good,  but  】iis  destiny  unlucky,  or  liis  disposition  had.  aud  liis  fate 
lucky.  Good  ami  bad  actions  are  the  result  ol'  natural  disposition. 
Iiap|>iiii*ss  and  misfortune,  good  and  bad  luck  are  dt'.stiny.  GckxI 
deeds  may  lead  to  inishaj),  then  f lie  disposition  is  good,  but  destiny 
cruel,  and  likewise  mis(l«M*<ls  may  result  in  Iiappinesa.  in  that  case 
man's  nature  is  、、- ".k'、（l.  but  fat*'  smilini;.  Nature  is  go'"l  or  had  of 
its  own  accord,  and  so  is  latr  lucky  or  unlurk y.  A  ravourito  of 
late,  though  not  doing  well,  is  not,  of  necessity,  deprived  of  ha|>|>i- 
ness  for  that  reason,  whereas  an  ill-late*!  man  dors  not  got  rid  of 
his  misfortune,  though  trying  liis  best. 

said: —  "  To  strive  for  a  tiling,  one  must  have  、viwlom， 
but  whotlier  he  attains  it,  depfrids  u[)ou  destiny."  1  Witli  a  good 
disposition  one  can  struggle  for  it  and,  if  fate  be  favourable, 
obtain  it:  should,  however,  i'atc  be  averse,  on,'  may  with  a  good 
nature  strive  for  it.  but  never  gt't  it. 

Bad  deeds  arc  follow  «•(!  by  inislortun«'.  Yet  the  robbers  Cl^ 
and  Chtuiuy  C/i'iao3  wero  scourges  t<»  the  w  liolf  ^mpiie.  With  some 
thousands  of  other  bandits,  wlioin  thry  liad  collected,  they  assaulted 
and  robbed  j)eo|)le  of  their  j>ro|R'rty,  and  rut  tluMn  to  pieces.  As 
outlaws  they  were  ihhmj nailed.  Thcv  ought  to  have  been  disgracrd  ： 
far  from  it,  they  finisht'd  tlit-ir  lives  as  old  men.  In  the  face  of 
this,  how  can  the  idea  ol*  a  (-oncomitant  destiny  be  uplidd? 

Men  witli  an  adverse  destiny  <lo  well  iu  tl"'ir  hearts,  but 
meet  with  disasters  abroad.    How  is  it  tli.at  men  like  Ym    灣 3  ； ind 

1  Menchut,  Book  VII,  Pt.  I,  chap.  3. 

5  Two  famous  rolihers  of  antiquity,  cspcdally  tlw  fonner.  to  wlntni  a  rlirtpt^r 
«  devoted  in  (  huang  Tw. 

1  The  same  a»  Yen  Hui,  the  favourite  disciple  of  (  on/uchu. 


Digitized  by  Google 


140 


Liin  -Hrng:  H.  Metnphysical. 


Po  Niu  carae  to  disgrace?  They  were  both  virtuous,  and  should 
have  been  rewarded  by  a  concomitant  destiny  with  bliss  and  happi- 
ness. Wlierefore  did  they  meet  with  misfortune?  Yen  Y»an,  confined 
to  his  study,  killed  hi 細 elf  by  his  great  talents,1  Po  Nit"  while  living 
quite  alone,  caught  a  horrible  disease.  Ch  il  P  ing  and  Wu  Yuan 
were  the  most  loyal  ministers  of  their  sovereigns,  and  scrupulously 
fulfilled  tlu'ir  duties  as  servants  to  the  king.2  In  spite  of  this,  the 
corpse  of  ('h  ii  lJ  iny  、vas  left  unburicd  in  Ch  u，  and  in  Wu  Yrttan'^ 
body  was  cooked.  For  their  good  works  they  should  have  obtaiued 
the  happiness  of  concomitant  destiny,  but  they  tell  in  with  the 
misfortune  of  adverse  fate.    How  is  sucli  a  thing  possible? 

ConcomitatTt  destiny  cxcludt's  adverse  ilestiiiy,  and  adverse 
destiny,  a  concoinitaiit  one.  On  what  basis  c&n  the  scholastic  dis- 
tinction of  three  kinds  of  destiny  then  be  established?  Moreover, 
fate  is  already  visible  from  tlie  structure  of  bones  at  tlie  time  of 
birth,  now,  if  it  be  said  to  follow  the  actions,  it  comes  afterwards, 
and  is  not  yet  tliere  from  the  beginning;.  Wealtli  aud  lioriour. 
poverty  and  misery  are  determined  at  the  first  monteiit  of  recepti- 
bility  of  the  human  being,  they  do  not  arrive  only  in  company  with 
his  actions,  afu*r  the  individual  has  grown  up. 
•  A  man  with  a  natural  fate  will  die  at  the  age  of  a  huiulre<l 
years,  another  with  a  concomitant  fate  at  the  age  of  liity,  but  he 
whose  fate  is  adverse,  meets  with  distress  tVom  the  moment  he 
receives  vitality:  as  people  say,  he  is  confronted  with  ill-lui_-k  al- 
ready as  an  embryo.  He  may  have  been  born  during  a  thunderstorm 
and,  when  lie  is  grown  up,  die  yoting. 

These  are  what  they  call  the  three  (lestinics.  there  are  also 
distinguished  three  kinds  of  natures:  natural  voKcomitwU,  and  adrerse. 
Naturally  man  iu  endowed  with  the  five  virtues,  concomitant  nature 
corresponds  to  that  of  father  and  niotlier,  and  adverse  nature  is 
caused  by  meeting  some  unpropitious  objoct.8    Thus  a  pregnant 

1  He  worked  too  hard,  and  died  at  the  age  of  thirty-two.  His  hair  had 
turned  quite  while  already.  (Cf.  Lfggt -、  AnalecUf,  Prolegomena  p.  l】3.) 

- Ch'ii  }  tian  or  f  7i  a  P  ing,  a  faithful  counsellor  of  Prince  Ilti  ni  of  f  7i'm  in 
the  4 tit  century  B.C.,  coiiimitted  suicide  by  drowning  liinisell',  because  his  adiin)iiitions 
were  disregarded.  The  dragon-boat  festival  is  celebrated  in  coiimieinoration  thereof. 
Wu  Yuan  or  Wu  Tun,  a  minister  of  the  last  king  of  Wu  circa  520  B.C.  was  sentenced 
to  perish  by  his  own  hand.  His  body  was  .iltcrwards  sown  into  a  leather  wine-sack,  and 
i  ;t.st  into  llie  river  near  Soochow,  where  he  lias  been  deified  as  tlie  spirit  of  the  water 
like  Chii  P  i,,!,.  This  is  the  common  tradition.  (Of.  Mayers  Manual  N.  879  and  Gil", 
Hiogr.  Ihct.  N.  23nN.    According  to  Wnnff  「/— /  the  body  of  \Y,i  Ytum  was  cooked.) 

s  The  term  nature  i>  used  in  tlie  sense  oi"  spirilUiil  nature,  disposition,  ;i> 
well  as  lor  coustilution,  i.  e.  physical  qualities. 


Digitized  by  Google 


What  is  meant  by  Destiny? 


in 


womaa  eating  a  hare  will  bear  a  liarelipped  son.  In  tlie  YUeh-ling 1 
it  is  stated  that,  in  the  same  month  the  thundor  is  about  to  utter 
its  voice,  and  that  those  wlio  are  not  careful  of  their  behaviour, 
will  bring  forth  crippleil  children,  and  have  great  calamities. 

They  become  dumb  or  deaf,  lame  or  blind.  The  embryo 
having  been  affected  by  external  i  nil  nonces,  the  child's  character 
will  be  violent  and  rebellious.  Ynng  SJie  Sliih  Was 1  voice,  after  liis 
birth,  sounded  like  tltat  ol'  a  wolf.  Wlien  he  grew  older,  he  showed 
a  wicked  disposition:  he  mot  with  misfortune,  and  died.  He  got 
this  character  already,  when  still  in  his  mother's  womb.  The  like 
holds  good  for  Tnu  Chn  'K  and  Shmnj  ( '/lilii.*  Character  and  destiny 
are  there  from  the  brgiuning.  Therefore  the  Li  points  out  a  method 
to  instruct  embryos. s  As  long  as  tlie  child  is  in  the  uterus,  the 
mother  must  not  sit  down,  it'  the  mat  be  not  properly  placed,  nor 
eat  anything  not  cut  in  the  proper  manner.  I  Icr  eyes  must  sex* 
but  the  proper  i.olours,  arul  lier  ear«  hear  but  the  proper  sounds. 
When  the  child  gro、vs  up,  it  must  be  given  intelligent  teachers 
and  good  instructors,  wlio  will  make  it  familiar  witli  tlie  relations 
of  sovereign  und  subjoft,  father  and  son,  t'or  at  that  period  its 
virtue  or  depravity  will  become  manifest.  If  at  the  moment,  when 
the  child  receives  the  vitalising  fluid,  the  mother  does  not  take 
care  to  keep  her  heart  free  from  wild  faucics  and  fears  of  wicked- 
ness, her  child,  when  grown  up,  will  not  be  good,  but  fierce  and 
refractory,  and  look  ugly  and  wicked.  A  heavenly  maiden  ex- 
plained to  Huang  7V8  tltat  to  have  live  wives  not  only  entails  bodily 
injury  on  father  and  inother,  but  also  most  seriously  affects  tlie 
cliaraoters  of  sons  and  daughters. 

Men  liave  their  destiny  and  luck,  contingencies  and  chance. 
By  tlestiny  tliev  are  wealthy  and  poor,  exaltvd  and  base:  their 
luck  is  thriving  or  declinine:,  flourishing  or  fading.  Those  whose 
destiny  it  is  to  be  rich  and  lionoured,  meet  with  :i  thriving  luck; 
they  enjoy  perpetual  tranquillity,  and  are  nevtT  in  jeopardy.  On 

«  The  YOrh-ling  is  the  Book  HI,  N.  (5  of  tlie  U-Ki,  tlie  Book  of  Rik，.  The 
"same  month"  referred  to  in  the  passage,  quoted  from  the  ) ueh-Ung,  is  the  second 
month  of  spring.  Wang  ( 'Hung  seems  to  lmve  had  in  view  the  final  paragraph  as 
well,  which  says  that,  if  in  the  last  month  of  winter  the  spring  ceremonies  were  ob- 
served, the  embryos  would  suffer  many  disasters.  (Cf.  Leggt,  Li  A'»,  Book  IV, 
p.  260  and  310  [Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  Vol.  XXVII].) 

2  A  native  of  Chin,  6th  cent.  b.c. 

3  The  unworthy  son  of  the  emperor  Yao  2357  b.c. 

*  The  degenerated  son  of  the  emperor  Shun  2255  B.r. 
»  Cf.  Ta-tai-ti  chap.  3,  p.  6v  (Han  Wei  tmng  »hu). 
6  The  first  emperor,  a  mythical  personage. 


Digitized  by  Google 


142 


Lun-Hi'nj;:  B.  Metapbysical. 


tho  other  Iiand  do  such  as  are  doomed  to  poverty  and  misery,  fall 
in  with  a  declining  lu<"k :  they  are  the  victims  of  ill-fortune:  al- 
ways in  trouble,  they  know  no  plcasuro. 

A  cont'mgenaj  is  some  e.\traor<linary  change,  sucli,  lor  instance, 
as  were  experienced  by  Vlt  emj  T' n，,g,1  when  lie  was  kept  a  prisoner 
in  ilsia-tai  and  by  \VM  Wnnr/r  when  detained  at  Yu-fi.  For  sages, 
witli  all  tlieir  perfections,  to  be  tlirown  into  jail,  this  certainly  can 
be  called  an  extraordinary  contingency.  But  however  great  the 
change  may  bo,  in  the  case  of  a  favourable  destiny  and  a  thriving 
luck  it  does  no  harm.  This  it  what  tlioy  call  a  contingent  inisliap. 
That  which  befell  Yen  Tses  must  be  regarded  as  a  great  one.  Let 
us  suppose  that  a  weapon  be  pointed  at  a  man's  breast,  tl"'"  the 
bright  blade  be  already  touch ing-  his  neck,  that  lie  rush  forward 
to  certain  doatli,  or  that  lie  oppose  liiuist'li'  to  tho  points  of  swonls 
and  halberds,  let  such  a  man  be  sav<ul  just  at  the  moiiieut,  when 
1"，  t-xpeets  to  die,  then  his  destiny  is  so  good,  and  his  luck 
so  nourishing,  that  the  misfortune  lie  '-、 m'mintcrs  cannot  injure 
him.   At  IJ-tjany  ami  Ch  any  where  (lie  catastroplie  took  place,4 

were  certainly  pcoj.lo  witli  a  jiropitions  i'nte  and  n  thriving  lm*k, 
wlio  were  all  crushed  to  dcatli  in  the  sam<*  uiglit.  Tlic  disaster 
tlicy  nift  with  was  so  paramount,  tli.it  tlieir  good  fate  an<l  thriving 
luck  could  not  ward  it  oil*.  This  may  b«»  comj)arod  to  the  antago- 
nism between  w  atrr  and  tiro.  If  the  water  is  stronger,  it  quells 
tlic  fire,  and  if  the  H re  is  stronger,  it  ov crcoincs  tlie  water.  To 
tirul  (*in|)loymo[it,  a  man  must  gt't  hold  of  an  employer.  In  spite  of 
a  propitious  fate  and  thriving  lurk  nobody  will  be  able  to  show 
what  lie  is  capable  of,  unless  1"，  romos  into  contact  witli  a  master 
who  takes  an  interest  in  liim.6 

The  、vor(l  chana'  conveys  the  idea  of  good  and  evil  derived 
from  accidents.   A  culprit,  、vlio  succoeds  in  making  his  escape,  has 

1  The  founder  of  the  Shang  dynasty,  wlio  was  iniprisoncd  by  the  last  emperors 
of  the  Ifsia. 

•J  The  ancestor  of  the  house  of  ('hou.  He  was  incarcerated  at  Yu-li  by  the 
last  emperor  of  tlie  Shuny  dynasty. 

3  Under  Yen  T*e  ^«  ^H,  a  celebrated  statesman  of  the 
Dukes  of  f 'lit,  is  usually  understood.  Since 】>n  Yinff  was  very  successful  in  his 
career,  no  misfortune  whatever  being  recorded  of  liim,  I  would  suggest  (o  alter 
§  ^f-  into 顔子， abbreviated  for 顔囘 i'en  //«,,  the  name  of  tlie  ill-fated 
disciple  of  (  onfucitis,  whose  misfoilune,  his  untimely  death,  is  tnentioiied  above  p.  2'"; 
and  elsewhere. 

4  See  above  p.  1 36. 

u  III  addition  to  good  luck,  according  to  our  author,  he  who  seeks  employment 
rtMjuires  a  ruiitingeiiry,  lie  must  tinil  moiuc  one  who  a|i|>ret'!;itt\s  liii". 


igitized  by  Google 


What  is  meant  by  Destiny  ？ 


143 


good  fortune,  whereas  it  is  bad  fortune,  if  an  innoi*«'iit  man  be 
arrested.  He  who  after  a  short  incarceration  obtains  his  release, 
has  a  propitious  destiny  and  thriving  luck  so,  that  tlie  misfortune 
of  an  untimely  end  cannot  a  fleet  Jiim. 

Now  for  tt"'  meaning  of  incident,  whicli  will  be  illustrated  by 
the  service  o  He  red  to  a  sovereign.  Providcil  that  somobody  serve 
rlie  sovereign  in  the  |)roj)er  way,  that  tlie  latter  appreciate  liis 
wort  Is.  and  afterwanls  employ  liini,  tliis  is  a  lucky  incident.  Conver- 
sely, if  the  prinoe  disprove  of  rlie  man's  ways  so,  that  lie  dismisses 
(urn,  and  sends  him  away,  this  is  an  unlucky  incident.  Should  a 
man  after  a  short  period  of  (!is*>ra<!e  still  y;«'t  an  apiioiiitincnt  through 
tlie  recoininaiidatiou  of  a  higlicr  ofiiciul,  lie  owes  it  to  his  go("l 
destiny  and  thriving  luck,  wliicli  do  not  allow  that  the  harm  (paused 
by  an  unlucky  incident  keeps  on  lor  lorijj;. 

Contingencies  aiul  cliamv  cither  tally  with  destiny  and  luck 
or  disagree  with  tht'in.  To  hit  on  good  clianccs,  and  tlius  reach 
the  goal,  or  to  meet  with  bad  ones,  and  1"'  ruined,  is  tallying  witli 
tlestiny  and  lui，k.  To  full  off  in  mid-ca reel",  without  completing  wliat 
is  to  come,  good  being  suddenly  turned  into  evil,  tliis  is  contrary 
io  fate  and  lurk.  In  tliis  \\ orl<l  hhmi's  ilisspositions  and  destinies 
are  auspii'ions  or  uufavourablt',  their  liappines^  and  inisfortum" 
flourish  or  d('din<'.  AH  dej)en«U  on  rontingenoies.  According  to 
the  ('liaiices  tliey  liavc,  they  either  live  or  dio.  But  those  who 
a<rnin|)lish  all  their  or  bad  tlrrds,  and  obtain  all  thoir  heart's 

ilesires,  are  IV w. 


Digitized  by  Google 


144 


Ltm-H('ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


CHAPTEK  IX. 
On  Destiny  and  Fortune  {Min<j-lu). 

Man's  success  as  well  as  his  troubles  depend  upon  destiny. 
It  determines  his  life  and  his  deatli,  and  the  length  of  his  span, 
and  it  likewise  provides  for  liis  rank  and  his  wealth.  From  tlie 
princes  and  dukes  downwards  to  tlie  comraonere,  and  from  the 
sages  and  worthies  down  to  the  illiterate  people,  all  those  who 
have  a  hoad  and  eyes,  and  blood  in  their  veins,  each  and  every 
one  possess  their  own  destiny.  If  any  our  is  to  become  poor  aud 
miserable,  lie  will  be  involved  in  misfortunes  aud  disasters,  even 
though  he  passes  through  wealth  and  honour,  whereas  lie  lor 
whom  weal tli  and  honour  are  in  store,  meets  with  happiness  aiu) 
bliss  even  in  the  midst  of  penury  and  misery.  Therefore,  wlioe vei- 
ls predestinated  for  great  things,  rises  by  himself  from  his  humble 
position,  while  another  whose  late  is  misery,  falls  down  from  liis 
high  sphere. 

Tims  it  seems,  as  if  the  gods  leut  their  help  to  the  wealthy 
and  the  great  folks,  and  as  if  the  mishap  of  the  poor  and  low 
class  peo[)le  were  the  work  of  tlie  demons.  When  future  grandees 
study  with  others,  tliey  alone  reaeh  the  goal,1  and  after  having 
taken  office,  they  alone  are  promoted  from  among  thoir  colleagues. 
What  the  future  rirli  men  strive  for  with  other  competitors,  they 
alone  obtain,  and  what  they  do  conjointly,  tliey  alone  <;omplete. 
With  poor  and  low  people  it  is  just  the  reverse.  They  fail  iu 
their  studies,  fail  to  be  promoted,  and  fail  to  complete  what  they 
liave  begun.  They  make  themselves  guilty,  suffer  punishment,  fall 
sick,  die,  and  perish.  The  loss  of  wealth  and  honour  means  pov- 
erty and  ineanne88. 

(Aonse<[uently,  there  is  no  guarantee  wliatever  ttiat  men  of 
high  endowments  and  excellent  conduct  will  in  any  case  attain  to 
wealth  and  honour,  and  we  must  not  imagine  that  others  whose 
knowledge  is  very  limited,  and  whose  virtue  is  but  small,  are  there- 
fore doomed  to  poverty  and  misery.    Sometimes,  men  of  great 

1  Passing  the  examinations,  which  is  mere  luck. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Destiny  and  Fortuue. 


145 


talents  and  excellent  conduct  have  a  bad  fate,  whicli  cripples  them, 
and  keeps  thein  down,  anil  people  with  scanty  knowledge  and 
small  virtue  may  have  such  a  propitious  fate,  that  they  soar  up 
and  take  a  brilliant  flight. 

Wisdom  and  dullness,  pure  and  mean  conduct  under  given 
circumstances  are  diameter  and  natural  gifts:  high  and  low  rank 
in  the  official  career,  and  wealth  ami  poverty  in  business  depend 
on  destiny  and  tim,'.  Destiny  is  not  amenable  to  coercion,  or  time 
to  compulsion.  The  knowing,  therefore,  leave  every  thing  to  Heaven, 
placid,  serene,  and  equaijimous  even  in  case  their  poverty  or  mis- 
ery should  be  changed  into  wealth  and  honour. 

When  in  digging  a  creek  or  cutting  firewood  a  special  energy 
be  shown,  or  great  strength  be  displayed,  then  by  dint  of  digging 
the  creek  will  be  docpeued,  and  by  dint  of  hewing  much  wood 
will  lie  cut  down.  Even  people  without  a  fate  would  thus  obtain 
their  ends,  how  then  would  poverty  and  meanness,  disasters  aud 
(laogere  come  in?  Perhaps  heavy  showers  n light  interfere  with  the 
completion  of  the  creek,  or  the  wood-cutter  might  fall  in  with  a 
tiger,  before  he  liad  gathered  much  wood.  Vhv  low  rank  of  an 
official  aud  the  unprofitableness  of  a  business  are  like  the  showers 
interrupting  the  digging  of  a  creek,  and  like  tlie  tiger  met  by  the 
wood-cutter. 

Perhaps  able  men  find  no  oc<;asion  to  use  their  talents,  and 
the  wise  cannot  practise  t.l»''ir  wisdom,  or  tliey  use  their  talents, 
but  have  no  success,  and  practise  their  principles,  but  tlo  not  ac- 
complish what  they  liad  in  view.  Though  being  as  gifted  and  as 
wise  as  ('"nfuciw?,  it  may  happen  that  they  never  come  to  the  front. 
The  world  seeing  their  high  moral  standard  will  ask,  "  How  is  it 
that  these  sort  of  worthies  and  wise  men  do  not  become  exalted?," 
and  admiring  their  deep  thoughts,  they  will  say,  "  Why  do  men 
of  sucb  a  wonderful  intellect  not  become  ri、，h?" 

Rank  and  wealth  depend  upon  fate,  happiness  and  fortune 
are  not  connected  with  wisdom  and  intelligence.  Therefore  it  is 
said  that  wealtli  cannot  be  acquired  by  calculations,  nor  rank  be 
secured  by  talents.  Profound  philosophy  does  not  procure  riches, 
and  the  highest  accomplishments  do  not  win  an  official  post.  Those 
who  carry  silver  in  their  bosoms  and  wear  pendants  of  red  jewels, 
are  not  necessarily  a  ('fii、  or  a  Ihkli-  in  talent,  and  those  who 
amass  gold  or  heap  up  preiMous  stonos,  must  not   1),'  a  Chu  of 


1  The  god  of  cereals  (cf.  p.  130). 

， The  wise  minister  of  8hm  (cf.  chap.  XXXIX). 

I-UD-Hrng.  I'J 


piigit^ed  by  Google 


146 


Lnii-H«'np:  B.  Metaphysical. 


Too  1  in  wisdom.  Not  seldom  simpletons  are  in  possession  of  a  thousand 
chin,  and  blockhoad;*  are  made  governors  of  a  city.  Offkprs  may 
show  the  same  ability  iti  their  adniinistration,  (heir  diffcront  rank 
is  the  n'sult  of  tlu'ir  fa  to,  and  in  doing  business  people  may  display 
t\w  same  knowledge,  thrir  diH'cnMit  wealth  is  the  outeomt*  of  their 
rortunc.  It  is  fortune  which  detfrmincs  wealth  and  poverty,  through 
knowlotlp;e  one  docs  m'itl""'  (lirive  nor  perish,  ami  it  is  destiny 
that  Wxvn  one's  high  or  low  position,  tlirougli  talents  one  does  not 
advance  or  fail  in  <nn>'s  cari'er. 

King  ('// t'ii(/',>  2  ability  did  not  equal  that  of  the  Dukt*  of  C/iou. 
and  Duke  1  Juan's^  intolli^rncc  fell  short  of  that  of  Kuan  (liuny. 
Nevertheless  ( 7i  haj  and  Hwm  wore  endowed  with  the  most  glorious 
fate,  whereas  the  Duke  of  (  fton  and  Kmm  Vlmmj  receivtnl  iuiVrior 
appointments  In  anoiiMit  tinios,  prinoes  very  seldom  did  not  learn 
from  their  ministers.  Possessing  an  extensive  knowledge  the  latter 
would,  as  a  rule,  act  as  thoir  fath<'rs  and  instructors.  In  spite  of 
this  unsuHirii'iH'y,  the  prim'es  would  take  the  place  of  sovereigns, 
and  their  minihtors  、vitli  all  tlieir  arcomplishments  had  to  servo  as 
their  im'nials.  That  slio、、、s  that  ruuk  tlepends  upou  destiny,  and 
not  on  intclli^enrv,  and  that  wealth  is  fjood  fortune,  and  lias 
nothing;  to  do  with  inontal  faculties. 

Most  people  discussing  tliese  (jucstions  fancy  that  men  of 
genius  ought  to  bi*  made  gem'rals  ami  ministers,  aud  that  less 
jspf'tt'd  persons  should  b<*C()mo  peasants  and  traders.  Observing  tliat 
scliolara  great  abilities  a  re  not  called  to  office,  thev  an*  surprised, 
and  reproach  tl"'m  with  im、"m|H'tt'ni，y  for  practical  business,  and 
likewise  t lioy  wonder  at  otlifr  scholars,  who  have  a  turn  of  min<l 
for  the  practical  (but  do  not  p't  on),  and  imagine  tliat  thoy  must 
be  too  weak  in  thfory.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  arc  not  aware 
that,  though  a  person  may  be  most  admirable  either  in  theory  or 
in  prartioe.  it  is  merely  destiny  tliat  governs  his  ofticial  status  and 
his  emoluments.  Wlu-ii  clcvor  men  undertake  something  at  a  lucky 
and  propitious  time,  and  hapj)iness  survenes,  tlicti  people  will  call 
tliotn  flt'ver,  wliert'as.  wlien  they  witness  a  decline,  and  the  arrival 
of  misfortuiu'.  thev  regard  them  as  stupid.  They  do  not  know  a 
lucky  and  inauspicious  fate,  or  a  thriving  and  declining  fortune. 

1  This  was  the  name  a.ssumed  hy  the  famous  minister  of  the  Yurh  State  Fan 
Li,  when,  having  retired  from  jmhlic  life,  he  lived  incognito  in  ( 'h 'i.  Under  this  naiix* 
lie  amassed  a  largo  fortuii*'  .so,  that  T  no  (  hu  Kutitj  l»us  beooine  a  synonym  for  a 
" millionaire."  iCf.  G,le^,  liihl.  Diet.  N.  540.) 

3  King  f'h  rn;]  of  tlie  C/ion  dynasty  (of.  chap.  XL). 

3  lluan,  duke  of  CM  (cf.  V.  170). ' 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Destiny  and  Korttuif. 


147 


Po  Kuei 1  and  Ts-.  KniKj2  made  a  fortune  by  tlie  transport  of 
wares,  and  had  heaps  of  gold  and  jewels.  Pe<)j)le  spoke  of  their 
excellent  methods  and  their  great  learning.  C/ui  Fu  Yen 3  was  de- 
spised and  sliglitcd  in  (  h  i,  which  would  have  none  of  him.  He 
wt-nt  to  tlie  imperial  palace,  and  presented  a  memorial,  whereupon 
ho  was  enijjloved  by  the  linn,  and  ros«、  in  oflicc  as  high  as  a 
minister  of  State.  Hsii  Yii^h  of  ( 'h(w  also  sent  up  a  memorial,  \vhc*u 
he  was  together  with  Yen  ( 'haixj.  Mis  .Alajosty  was  pl«'as<'(l  witli 
his  words,  and  appointefl  liim  st-orotary  of  a  board.  People  praise 
the  talents  of  Cl,u  Fu  Yen  and  the  skill  of  lUl  Yile/i,  but  tliey  are 
mistaken. 

"When  literati  are  able  to  comment  uj)ou  one  classic,  in  which 
thev  liave  become  well  versed  in  the  capital,  as  lucidly  as  Ktunuj 
C/ii/i  Kuei  and  as  thorouglily  as  CI  mo  '/:、■'，  7m,  who  passed  the  liret 
and  tlie  second  examinations  at  the  first  trial,  and  imnit'diatelv 
were  promoted  to  the  rank  of  a  secretary  of  a  ministry  and  of  an 
academician,  people  believe  that  they  liav(、  obtained  this  by  their 
profound  knowledge  of  the  classics  and  their  genius,  which  is 
wrong. 

In  the  case  of  able  speakers4  such  as  Fan  >''"•/'  who  in  (  h in 
was  ennobled  (as  a  Marquis  of  Yiny,  and  of  7' .、■"'•  7>/"  who  after 
he  had  spoken  to  Fan  Sui,  was  ap[ioiuted  alien  ininistrr,7  tliey 
pretend  that  these  lmppy  results  were  brought  about  l»y  the  ex- 
cellence <>1'  Fan  Sui  and  T  sai  7V*5,  but  that  is  erroneous.  All  tho 
above-mentioned  persons  were  predestinated  for  (>|)iilenco  and  no- 
bility, and  it  was  just  the  proper  time  for  these  lucky  events  to  liappen. 

Coiifiuim  said,  "  Life  and  death  tlt'pcrul  on  Destiny,  wealth 
and  honour  come  from  Heaven.  "8  Duke  〃  hnj  of  Lu  wislied  to 
see  Mencius,  but  his  minion  Tsany  i  ttang  slandered  Mrnciits,  and 
dissuaded  him.    Menchts  said,  "  It  is  Heaven.""    (_:<'"ftwim,  a  sage, 

1  A  ke«n  business  man,  who  flotirished  under  the  Marquis  W>'n  of  Wei  in 
the  5th  cent.  b.c. 

1  A  disciple  of  (  onfwiun,  who  became  very  rich. 

3  Cku  Fu  Yen  lived  in  the  2nd  cent.  n.r.  He  was  an  enemy  of  Tumj  ('hung 
Shu  (cf.  p.  84). 

4  Who  could  explain  a  book,  and  solve  knotty  questions  in  the  ])te.soniT  of 
the  sovereign. 

5  Cf.p.  115. 

0  Cf.  chap.  XXIV. 

7  Because  T  nai  7V  wa.s  not  a  native  of  ( 7i  'iny  but  of  Yen.  King  ('h 'ao  of 
('h  m  (305—250  b.c.)  made  him  his  inini.sU:r  on  the  recoinniejidation  of  Fan  Sui. 

8  Cf.  p.  136. . 

' See  chap.  XXXIV. 

】',• 


Digitized  by  Google 


148 


Lmi-Ht'iig:  B.  Metaphysical. 


and  Metuitus,  a  Worthy,  exl)orting  people  to  conform  to  the  right 
principles,  did  not  《'oiifoun(l  truth  and  untrutli.  Since  they  sj)oke 
of  dcstinv,  it  is  evidt-ut  tliat  there  is  a  destiny.  /, 聽' Aa«  7»v 
says  in  his  work,  "  Hi'iievolenc«-  and  mcannos«  depend  upon  time, 
not  on  conduct,  and  profit  and  loss  are  brought  about  by  fato, 
not  by  knowledge."  And  (Via  Yil  states,  "With  Heaven  one 
cannot  fix  a  time,  and  with  T'io  one  cannot  lay  plans.  Early  and 
late  are  predt'tcrminod  by  (lt'stinv.    How  could  the  time  be  known? " 

When  h'ao  Tsu  fouglit  against  Ch  ing  Pn,"  he  was  hit  by  a 
stray  arrow.  His  illness  being  very  serious,  the  Empress  Lil  I  Ion 
consulted  an  able  physician.  This  doctor  said  that  the  disease 
could  bp  cun-d,  but  Kan  Tsu  abused  him  saying,  "  I.  a  simple 
citizen,  have  with  inv  sword  of  three  feet  conquered  tlie  world. 
Was  that  not  IIoa\  en's  docroe.'  Destiny  depends  on  Heaven.  Even 
a  Pu  n  Ch  ioh 3  would  he  no  use."4  When  //〃/,  Il4u 5  spoke  with 
the  emperor  on  military  tilings,  lie  said  to 八 7:"/，  "  The  heavenly 
appointment,  of  which  Your  Majesty  speaks,  cannot  be  won  by 
skill  or  force." 

Yany  Tse  Yfhi 6  teaches  that  to  meet  with  what  one  desires,  or 
not  to  mort  with  it,  is  fate,  ami  the  Grand  Anualv>t  asserts  that 
wealth  and  honour  do  not  exclude  poverty  and  meanness,  and  that 
the  latter  do  not  excliule  wealth  and  honour.  That  means  that 
opulence  and  nobility  may  turn  into  indigence  and  humbleness,  and 
that  indi^enire  and  huinbleiicvss  may  be  changed  into  opulence  and 
nobility.  Rich  and  noble  persons  do  uot  desire  poverty  and  misery, 
but  poverty  and  misery  inav  oome  of  themselves,  and  poor  and 
humble  fellows  m^y  not  strive  for  wealth  and  honour,  yet  wealth 
and  honour  fall  to  their  sort  spontaneously. 

When  in  spring  or  summer  people  die  in  prison,  and  when 
in  autumn  and  winter  tliey  wear  an  air  of  prosperity,7  this  is 
not  the  result  of  their  works.  The  sun  rises  in  the  morning,  and 
sets  in  the  evening,  not  because  people  wish  it,  for  the  principle 
of  Heaven  is  Hj>outaueit\ .   The  King  of  Tni 8  arrived  from  7a*',  and 

1  A  scholar  of  (he  2nd  cent.,  who  wrote  the  llsin-shu  and  some  poetry. 

2  The  king  of  lluai-nan,  who  had  revolted. 
*  A  celebrated  physician. 

4  The  passage  is  (juoted  from  the  Shi-c/u,  chap.  S  (f'havaiut^,  Mnn.  Hi*t. 
Vol.  II,  p.  400). 

h  One  of  the  Three  Heroos  who  helped  Han  Kao  Tm  to  witi  the  throne. 
«  Cf.  p.  124. 

7  According  to  Cliine.se  customs  executions  of  eriiuinaU  take  place  in  autumn. 
n  The  fifth  son  of  tlic  emperor  Kno  Tm.    The  empress  IaL  hou  wished  to 
leave  the  empire  lo  one  of  the  Lu  princes,  lier  own  kinsmen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Destiny  and  fortune. 


140 


became  the  Emperor  Wfn  Ti. 1  C/iou  Yn  /<，'/, 2  an  illegitimate  son, 
was  made  Marquis  of  Tiao.  At  first,  tlie  King  of  Tai  was  not  heir- 
apparent,  and  Chou  Ya  Ftt  was  not  tlio  legitimate  son,  but  they 
encountered  the  proper  time,  and  fell  in  with  thv  right  moment, 
which  led  to  their  elevation. 

In  case  a  person  predt'stinated  for  poverty.  a«Mjuires  wealth 
by  his  exertions  and  his  energy,  lie  dies,  wlien  he  has  made  a 
fortune,  and  should  another  (loomed  to  humility  win  honours  by 
his  talents  and  abilities,  he  will  be  (Hsniisso<l,  when  1"，  has  made 
himself  a  position.  They  win  wealtli  and  honour  by  their  onergy 
and  their  genius,  but  are  unable  to  keep  in  possession  of  fate  and 
luck,  just  as  a  vessel  holds  but  a  certain  quantity,  und  as  a  hand 
lifts  but  a  certain  weiglit.  If  a  v'ssel  holds  just  oiu»  pint,  thou 
one  pint  exactly  fills  it,  but,  as  soon  as  tlicre  is  more  than  one 
pint,  it  flows  over.  Provided  tliat  a  liand  can  just  lift  one  c/ifin,s 
then  it  balances  one  cl"h"  but,  when  one  cliiln  is  exceeded,  fie  who 
lifts  it  up,  tumbles  and  falls. 

Former  generations  knew  tlie  truth,  therefore  they  ascribed 
every  thing  to  destiny,  and  sucli  is  destiny  indeed.  Those  wlio 
trust  in  destiny,  can  live  in  retirement  and  await  tlieir  time.  They 
need  not  exhaust  their  vitality,  or  harass  tlu*ir  bodies,  hunting 
after  it ― for  it  is  like  pearls  and  jewels,  concealed  in  lakes  and 
mountains.  Heaven's  fate  is  difficult  to  know.  People  arc  unahle 
to  find  it  out.  Althou^li  tlieir  fate  be  propitious,  they  have  no 
confidence  in  it,  and  thorefore  seek  it.  If  tliey  understood  it,  thrv 
would  \w  aware  that,  though  ll^eiiiy;  wealth  and  sliuniiing  honour, 
at  length  they  cannot  get  rid  of  it. 

Thus  they  presume  that  force  overcomes  poverty, 謹 1  that 
diligence  vanquishes  misfortune.  They  exert  themselves,  and  do 
their  utmost  to  acquire  wealtli,  and  tliey  cultivate  tlieir  faculties, 
and  purify  their  conduct  to  win  honour.  But  neglcctinp:  the  proper 
time,  and  acting  in  a  wrong  way,  they  will  never  obtain  the  、、- *'altli 
and  honour  they  crave  for.  Even  though  tliey  admit  the  existence 
of  fate,  they  imagine  that  if  must  be  sought. 

He  who  is  convinced  that  fate  cannot  be  sought,  maintains 
that  it  must  come  of  its  own  accord.  One  obtains  it  of  itself 
without  any  alien  assistance,  it  is  fompleted  witliout  any  work, 
and  it  arrives  spontaneously  without  auy  cooperation  on  the  part 
of  the  recipient.    The  nerves  and  sinews  of  those  who  are  to  be 

1  179-157  b.c. 

1  Chief  minister  of  "an  Wen  Ti  (cf.  chap.  XXFV). 


Digitized  by  Google 


150 


Ltln-Hriig:   B.  M«Mapli>>iral. 


rich,  bocomo  strong  of  thomselves,  and  those  who  are  to  have  rank 
and  titles,  ^ct  a  fine  inti'llect  spontai"、ously，  just  as  in  a  thousand  I」 
liorsc 1  tl"'  lioad,  tlie  *、'v«、s，  the  fet'r,  and  the  hoofs  all  suit  t*>irether. 

That  fate,  if  sought,  cannot  be  obtainod,  does  not  mean  that 
it  can  be  won.  if  not  allVrted.  Mt'n  of  great  knowledge  need  n«»t 
seek  honour,  lor  it  comrs  of  its  own  accord,  and  the  active  and 
energetic  need  nor  seek  wealth,  for  it  falls  to  rhem  spontaneously. 
Tin'  happinrss  oi'  w  raltli  ami  honour  cannot  he  attra(^i*(l  by  any 
eflorts.  nor  can  the  iiuliappines  o!'  |>o\  »Tty  and  Immblenoss  ht* 
！ simply  avoidrd.  Consequently,  the  fate  of  w  oaltlj  and  lionour  is 
obtained  without  any  oH'ort.  Tliosr  、vh<>  believe  in  fate  will  say 
they  know  that  luck  nMjuires  no  seeking.  Wlirn  the  heavenly  fate 
is  jjarticularly  lucky,  it  is  obtained  spontaneously  without  an  etlorf. 
wherea.s,  when  it  is  unpropitious,  all  endeavours  arc  of  no  l"'Ip 
against  it. 

As  ciojUuh's  n re  born  not  I— waus,'  f liov  liavt*  wished  it.  so 
int'ii  be<!oine  exalted  without  liaving  struggled  for  it.  Human 
character  is  such,  that  .some  peoplo  are  j*ood  <、f  themselves  without 
instruction,  and  that  others  never  become  fxootl  in  spite  of  instruc- 
tion. The  lioavonly  natutv  is  likf  fa  to.  King  Yi  of  WW'2  csrapod 
into  tl"'  mountains,  rarncstlv  dcsiriiif;  not  lo  becoiuc  king,  aiul 
wishino;  t«>  lind  a  substitute.  B»it  tlio  people  of  Yiu/t  sniok(*<l  his 
den  so,  that  <it  last  lie  «"f>ul(l  not  t*scapt%  and  ascended  the  throne 
hv  force.  Hv  Heaven  s  fate  it  liad  to  be  so.  Thou^li  fleoing  and 
running  away  from  it,  he  onuld  not  avoid  it  at  last.  Thus  lu* 
s|M)iitaneouslv  obtained  the  lionour  which  he  had  not  sought. 

1  A  swift  horse  s«[)|>osed  to  make  a  thousand  Li  in  one  day. 
- He  was  assawsinatod  bv  liis  younger  brother  in  370  b.c.  (( 'havannes,  M'tn. 
Higt.  Vol.  IV,  p.  433,  Note  5). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Oil  riianre  and  Lurk. 


151 


CHAPTER  X. 
On  Chance  and  Luck  {IIsin(/-ou). 

In  their  doings  im"i  may  be  clever  or  stupid,  hut  with  regard 
to  the  happiness  or  uiihap[)in(>ss,  which  fall  to  thoir  sliare,  they 
are  either  lucky  or  unlucky.  Their  works  are  good  or  evil,  but, 
whothor  tlicy  meet  with  rewards  or  punishment,  depends  on  tlieir 
good  or  bad  fortune.  If  several  people  sufl'er  an  armed  attack 
at  the  same  time,  those  who  find  a  hiding  placo,  an'  not  wounded, 
and  if  sonic  pt-rsons  are  overtaken  by  lVost  on  tlie  same  (lay,  those 
who  obtain  shelter,  suffer  no  injury.  It  docs  not  follow  tliat  the 
wounded  or  injured  are  wicked,  or  tliat  those  who  found  a  hiding 
|>l act*  or  a  shelter,  are  mfritorious.  To  titxl  a  refngt*  or  shelter  is 
<?ood  luck,  to  be  woundod  or  injured  is  bad  luck.  There  are  many 
who  would  be  pleased  to  give  proofs  of  their  loyalty,  but  out  of 
These  some  are  rewarded,  some  punislicd  ：  many  would  fain  lu'iiefit 
their  country,  hut  only  some  are  trusted  by  tlu'ir  sovereign,  the 
others  he  suspects.  Those  whom  hf  rewards  and  ronfkles  in,  are 
not  necessarily  trustworthy,  nor  are  those  whom  he  punishes  and 
mistrusts,  of  necessity  traitors.  Reward  and  trust  is  good  ibrtuno, 
punishment  and  suspicion,  bad. 

From  among  the  seventy  odd  pupils  of  Con/ttcit^,  Yen  Hut  died 
in  early  youth.  Confucius  said.  "  Unlurkily  his  span  was  short, 
therefore  he  died."  If  a  short  Iito  be  spoken  of  ns  unlucky,  then 
longevity  must  be  a  matter  of  luck,  and  a  short  life,  something 
unlucky.  He  who  walks  in  the  footsteps  of  sa^cs  and  worthies, 
and  expounds  the  doctrines  of  kindness  and  justice,  ought  to  enjoy 
bliss  and  happiness.  Howevor,  Po  Niu 1  fell  si(，k，  and  did  not  fare 
much  better  than  Yen  Hui:  tliey  were  both  unlucky. 

Mole-crickets  and  ants  creep  on  the  ground.  If  man  lifts  his 
foot,  and  walks  on  theui,  the  crickets  and  ants  crushed  by  his  iVet 
die  at  once,  whereas  those  which  are  untouched  continue  alive  and 
unhurt.  Wild  grass  is  consumed  by  fire  kindled  by  the  friction  of 
cart-wheels.  People  are  fond  of  tlie  grass  which  remained  unburnt, 
and  commonly  call  it  "  lucky  grass."  Nevertheless,  that  an  insert 
has  not  been  trodden  upon,  or  some  grass  not  been  reached  by 

1  Another  disciple  of  Confucius.  On  his  sickueMs  cf.  Analectt  VI,  X  and  p.  105. 


Digitized  by  Google 


152 


I.nn  -  Urng:  IJ.  Metajiltysical. 


the  fire,  is  not  yet  a  proof  of  their  excellence.  The  movement  of 
tlie  feet,  and  tlie  spread  of  the  (ire  are  merely  accidental. 

The  sam»'  reasoning  holds  good  for  the  breaking  out  of  ulcers. 
Wlien  tlie  free  circulation  of  humours  is  stopped,  tliey  coagulate, 
and  form  a  boil:  as  it  begins  to  run,  it  becomes  a  sore: 一 the  blood 
conies  out,  and  matter  is  discharged.  Are  those  pores,  where  the 
ulcer  breaks  through,  better  tliuii  others?  No,  only  the  working 
of  the  jj;oo(l  ennstitution  has  been  checked  ia  some  places. 

AV  hen  the  spider  has  woven  its  wel),  some  of  the  Hying  in- 
s«'cts  pass  it  unliaruied,  others  are  caught:  whon  the  hunter  has 
spread  his  nets,  some  of  the  beasts  stirred  up  come  to  bay,  the 
others  r.scape.  In  the  fishing;  nets  thrown  into  rivers  and  Jakes 
many  lisli  are  pulled  out,  others  get  away.  It  happens  tliat  robbers 
and  thf  like,  guilty  of  the  worst  o rimes,  arc  never  round  out, 
whereas  people  who  have  comiuitted  a  small  ollVnce  to  be  atoned 
lor  by  a  fine  only,  are  imuiodiately  discovered.  Thus,  general 
calamities  aiFert  people  differently.  Such  as  arc  unlucky  die  of 
tlie  shock,  and  the  lives  of  tlie  fortunate  are  spart-d.  Unlucky 
means  not  favoured  l>y  cinminstances.  G'nf"'""  said: ― "  Man's  life 
must  b*>  uprip;lit.  A  life  without  it  is  basod  on  good  fortune  only."1 
Accordingly,  those  who  on  a  smooth  road  meet  witli  accidents,  liave 
bad  luck. 

Should  anybody  standing  at  the  fo<»t  of  a  high  wall  be 
rrushi'd  by  its  fall,  or,  while  walking  on  a  river  hank  full  of 
crevices,  be  luirit'd  by  the  earth's  t-ollapsiug  under  his  feet,  such 
a  one  would  simply  have  met  with  an  accident,  that  is  to  say 
would  have  been  unlucky. 

The  city  gate  of  the  capital  of  L"  was  in  a  state  of  decay 
since  a  long  time,  and  about  to  tumbh'  down.  When  Chn/ucim  passed 
it,  he  liurriod  up,  and  tjuickened  his  pact'.  His  atlendante  said  to 
liim :-- "  It  lias  bc<Mi  like  tliis  ever  so  long."  Con/ucitis  replied  saying, 
" Its  having  so  long  ivniairu'd  so  is  just  what  displeases  me." 
( 'mifuciu.s  was  precautions  in  the  extreme:  liad  the  gate  fallen  down, 
just  wlien  hr  passed  it,  otu*  might  speak  of  him  as  unlucky. 
Crm/ucins  said,  "  Superior  men  may  have  no  luck,  but  there  are 
none  who  have  lurk,  low  pooj)lt'  often  have  luck,  and  there  are 
none  quite  devoid  ("'  luck,"2  and  further: 一 "  The  superior  man  keeps 

1  AnaUch  VI,  17. 

2  The  incaning  is  that  the  successes  of  superior  men  aro  due  to  thoir  own 
excellence,  uot  to  m«re  chance,  but  that  they  are  often  visited  with  misfortune. 
With  coiiimon  poo|ilc  it  is  dirt'erent.  Tht-ir  lia|)|)iiKvss  i«  ne\fr  tlieir  own  work,  but 
luck,  which  olien  favours  tiiem. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Cliance  and  Luck. 


in  safe  places,  thus  awaiting  his  destiny,  tlie  ordinary  man  courts 
dangers,  relying  on  favourable  circumstances."1  Impostors  like  Hung 
./,«，  and  Chieh  2  though  possessed  of  no  virtue  or  ability,  were 
nevertheless  admired  for  their  beauty;  unworthy  of  love,  they  found 
favour,  and  unfit  to  associate  with,  they  were  chosen  as  companions. 
According  to  right  and  reason  this  ought  not  to  be.  Therefore, 
the  Grand  Annalist  devotes  a  chapter  to  them.3  Bad  characters 
who  in  a  similar  way,  though  perverting  all  moral  principles,  are 
honoured,  aud  held  in  high  esteem,  are  by  a  common  name  called 
adventurers. 

If  a  man  devoid  of  virtue  receives  favours,  it  amounts  to  the 
same,  as  if  another  without  any  fault  of  his  own  meets  with  mis- 
fortune. All  creatures  originally  endowed  with  vitality  become 
partly  men,  partly  beasts,  or  birds.  Of  human  beings,  men  though 
tbey  be  one  and  all,  some  are  honoured,  otheru  despised,  some  are 
ricli,  others  poor.  The  rich  man  may  hoard  up  heaps  of  gold, 
•  whereas  a  poor  fellow  is  compelled  to  beg  for  his  food.  A  noble- 
mau  will  perhaps  rise  to  the  rank  of  a  marquis,  whilst  the  low 
born  sinks  into  a  state  of  slavery.  It  is  not,  because  Heaven  has 
given  them  different  qualities. 

Man's  natural  disposition  may  he  kind  or  mean  ；  yet  even  if 
tlie  conduct  of  some  persons  be  equally  honest  and  virtuous,  hap- 
piness and  misfortune  are  not  equally  divided  among  them,  and 
although  they  practise  benevolence  atid  justice  in  the  same  way, 
success  and  failure  are  not  the  same.  Whi  of  Cfiin4  sought  to  acquire 
knowledge  and  virtue,  and  Yen  of  I  hit 5  acted  with  benevolence  aud 
justice;  the  former  was  rewarded,  the  latter  utterly  ruined.  A  man 
of  Lufi  having  avenged  his  father,  remained  quietly  where  he  was, 
aud  did  not  flee.  The  pursuers  let  him  off.  Niu  Ch'deh  was  ab- 
ducted by  robbers  ；  he  endured  it  fearlessly  atid  with  equanimity, 
but  the  .  robbers  killed  him.  Now,  knowledge,  and  virtue  are 
about  the  same  as  benevolence  and  justice,  and  not  running 
away  as  much  as  fearlessness,  nevertheless  Duke  Wen  and  the  man 
of*  Lai  were  happy,  and  King  Yen1  and  Sin  Ch' ileh,  unhappy,  the 

1  ( 'ktutg-ifung  (Doctrine  of  the  Mean)  chap.  XV. 

a  Two  minions  of  the  emperors  //""  A'"o  Tm  (20  >  -194  n.r.)  and  Hui  77 
(194-187). 

s  Shi-chi  chap.  125. 

*  An  old  State  in  modern  Sluimi,  where  the  Marquis  Wni  reified  from 
77D-7-I4  B.c. 

5  Tlie  name  of  a  State,  whose  lords  were  viscounts,  in  modern  An/nu. 
0  Au  old  feudal  State  in  Shantung. 

7  Higher  titles  used  to  be  given  to  those  feudal  princes  tiiun  Uiey  were  entitled  to. 


154 


I.un-Hrng:  B.  Metaphysiral 


one  had  good  luck,  the  others  bad.  The  Duke  of  Han,  Chno,  while 
drunk  fell  asleep,  and  would  have  caught  cold  but  for  the  master 
of  caps,  who  covered  him  witli  a  cloak.  W lien  tlie  duke  became 
aware  of  it.  he  made  iiujuiries,  and  learnt  that  the  master  of  caps 
had  shown  him  this  mark  of  his  affection,  yot  lie  punished  him  for 
having  transgressed  his  proper  duties.  A  la (！ key  in  Wei  perceiving 
that  the  cliariotoer  was  driving  wrong,  shouted  from  behind  to- 
wards the  chariot  with  a  view  to  preserving  it  from  danger,  but 
was  not  called  to  account.  The  lackey  wlien  slioutin^  towards 
the  chariot,  and  the  master  of  tlie  caps  wlien  spreading  the  cloak, 
had  the  same  intentions.  The  one  was  afraid  that  his  master 
might  catch  cold,  tlie  other  tliat  liis  prince  would  be  in  danger. 
Hot)i  followed  the  impulses  of  goodness  and  kindlieartedness,  but 
tl"、  man  in  Han  was  i>unislie(l,  the  other  in  Wei,  considered  a  faith- 
ful servant.  The  lackey  had  good  fortune,  tlie  master  of  the 
caps  not.  • 

The  same  principle  applies  to  things  as  well  as  to  man. 
Bamboos  several  tenths  of  feet  in  height,  and  trees  measuring  some 
yards  in  circuinferonoe  are  cut  down  by  artisans  for  use.  Some 
are  worked  into  tools,  and  carried  here  and  there,  others  are  not 
taken  as  material,  and  iu^IlmM^hI.  The  artisans  are  not  biased  in 
favour  ol*  some,  or  prejudiced  against  others,  but  knives  and  adzes 
cut  down  the  wood,  as  it  were,  by  chance. 

Grain,  when  steamed,  becomes  food  ：  out  of  cooked  grain  wine 
is  distilled.  Distilled  wine  has  difreront  flavours,  it  may  be  sweet 
or  bitttT.  Cooked  food  tastes  differently,  being  cither  hard  or  soft. 
The  cook  and  the  distiller  while  at  work  have  not  different  in- 
tentions, but  the  inovenients  of  liaads  and  lingers  are  subject  to 
chance.  Well  done  lood  is  kept  in  different  baskets,  and  sweet 
wine  is  filled  in  various  vessels.  Supposini;  an  insect  drops  into 
such  a  vessel,  then  the  wine  is  spilled,  and  not  druiik ;  should  a 
mouse  contaminate  a  basket,  the  food  is  thrown  away,  and  not  eaten. 

The  various  plants  are  all  good  for  sometliing.  Those  which 
happen  to  be  plucked  by  a  physician,  become  medicine,  others  are 
left  in  the  rlried-up  ravines,  and  burnt  as  fuel.  So  with  metals: 一 
some  are  wrought  into  swords  and  halberds,  some  into  spears  aud 
hoes;  so  with  wood  ： ― some  is  shaped  into  the  beams  of  a  palace, 
some  into  tlie  pillars  of  a  bridge.  The  same  with  fire: ― it  may 
have  to  Iijrht  a  candle,  or  to  burn  dry  «rrass ；  the  same  with  earth : —— 
some  builds  up  halls  and  mansions,  some  serves  as  plaster  for 
porches,  and  with  water,  which  may  be  nsvd  lV>r  cleansing  tripods 
and  cauKlrons  as  well  as  lor  washing  iilthy  things. 


,  Digitized  by  Google 


On  Chance  and  Lurk. 


155 


All  things,  whether  good  or  bad,  are  used  by  man.  If  one 
can  be  sorry  for  those  things,  which  in  tliis  respect  h;ivo  no  luck 
and  no  dtance,  living  creatures  are  still  much  more  to  be  pitied. 

Shun  was  a  sa^e,  and  ou<;l)t  to  have  obtained  perfect  peare 
and  happiness  in  life.  But  he  had  a  blockhead  for  a  father  and 
a  silly  mother,  and  his  brother  was  arrogant  and  brutal.  They 
disliked  him,  the  faultless,  and  punished  him,  although  he  did  no 
wrong.  His  was  extremely  bad  luck.  Confucius  was  inferior  to 
Shun.  He  never  owned  a  foot  of  land  in  liis  life,  but  restlessly 
wandered  about,  seeking  employment.  His  traces  were  obliterated,1 
and  liis  food  cut  oir.2  In  spite  of  tlieir  being  sages  these  two 
personages  were  visited  with  bad  luck  and  bad  chance.  Shun  still 
happened  to  take  over  the  empire,  which  Yao  resigned  to  him,  but 
Confuciits  died  in  Cltueli-li.  If  even  with  the  qualities  of  a  sage 
one  lias  no  luck,  we  catiuot  be  surprised  to  find  much  bad  luck 
and  misfortune  among  ordinary  men. 

1  Chuang  Tse  XIV.  25v.  (T'ien-yiin)  infonns  us  that  the  traces  of  <  onfucim 
were  ohlit«rateii  in  Wei.  <  'onfucitis  spent  there  many  years  of  his  life,  but  without 
gaining  any  iiitluence  on  its  prince,  and  therefore  left  no  trace. 

2  When  ( 'onftichi4i  was  travelling  from  the  f'h  i'n  State  to  '/'>"',  his  provisions 
became  exhausted,  and  (  on/uciufi  witli  his  followers  had  to  suffer  Inmger.  Analects 
XV,  1.    Ch'itn  and  T'sai  were  situated  in  south-eastern  Ifonan. 


igitized  by  Google 


15<； 


Lmi-H«'ng:  B.  Metapfivsiral. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
Wrong  Notions  about  Happiness  {Fu-/isii). 

People  universally  believe  tliat  he  who  does  good,  meets  with 
happiness,  and  that  the  evil-doers  are  visited  with  misfortune.  That 
Heaven  sends  down  happiness  or  misfortune  in  response  to  man's 
doings.  That  the  rewards  graciously  given  by  the  sovereigns  to 
the  virtuous,  are  visible,  whereas  the  requital  oi*  Heaven  and  Earth 
is  not  ahv.nys  apparent.  There  is  nobody,  higli  or  low,  clever  or 
imbecile,  who  would  disagree  with  this  view.  Only  because  people 
see  suclt  deeds  recorded  in  books,  and  witness  that  sometimes  the 
good  really  become  happy,  they  come  to  believe  this,  and  take  it 
as  seli-evident.  Sometimes  also  sa^es  and  wise  men,  with  a  view 
to  inducing  people  to  do  good,  do  not  hesitate  to  assert  that  it  must 
be  so,  thus  showing  that  virtue  gets  its  reward.  Or  those  who 
hold  this  view,  have  themselves  experienced  that  felicity  arrived 
at  a  certain  juiurture.  A  thorough  investigation,  however,  will  oou- 
vinct1  us  that  happiness  is  not  given  by  Heaven  as  a  favour. 

Kiug  11  ni  of  Ch  "，1  when  eatinj;  salad,  found  a  leech  upon 
Kin  [>late,  and  forthwith  swallowed  it.  He  thereupon  felt  a  pain  in 
his  stomach,  and  could  eat  nothing.  Un  his  premier  asking  hi 出， 
how  he  had  got  this  disease,  he  replied :—"  Eating  salad,  1  found 
a  leecli.  1  thought  that,  if  1  scolded  those  responsible  for  it,  but 
did  not  punish  them,  I  would  disregard  the  law,  and  not  keep  up 
my  dignity.  Therefore,  I  could  not  allow  my  subjects  to  get  wind 
of  the  matter.  Had  1,  on  the  other  hand,  reproved  and  chastised 
the  defaulters,  strict  law  would  have  required  the  death  of  all  the 
cooks  and  butlers.  'J  o  that  I  could  not  make  up  my  mind.  Fearing, 
lest  my  attendants  should  perceive  tlie  leecli,  I  promptly  swal- 
lowed^  it." 

The  premier  rose  from  his  seat,  bowed  twice,  and  congratulated 
the  king,  saying,  "  I  liave  been  told  that  Heaven  is  impartial,  and 
that  virtue  alone  is  of  any  avail.  You  liave  benevolence  and  virtue, 
for  which  Heaven  will  reward  you.  Your  sickness  will  do  you  no 
fjreat  harm.', 

1 化 7— 430b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


WroHg  Notions  ahout  Happiness. 


157 


The  same  evening,  when  the  king  withdrew,  the  leech  came 
out,  and  an  ailment  of  the  heart  and  stoma di  of  wliifli  he  liad 
been  suffering  for  a  long  wliile,  was  cured  at  the  same  time.  Could 
not  this  be  considered  an  evidence  of  Heaven's  partiality  for 
virtue? ― No.  Tins  is  idle  talk. 

If  King  Hui  swallowed  the  leech,  he  was  far  from  being  wliat 
a  sovemgn  should  be,  and  for  unbecoming  deeds  Heaven  (leu's  not 
give  marks  of  its  favour.  King  Hui  could  not  hear  to  reproach 
the  guilty  with  tl>e  leerh  for  fVar,  lest  his  cooks  and  butlers  should 
all  have  to  sulFer  death  arrording  to  law.  A  ruler  of  a  State  can 
mete  out  rewards  and  punishments  at  pleasure,  and  pardoning  is 
a  prerogative  of  his.  Had  King  Hui  reprimanded  all  for  the  leoch 
found  iu  liis  salad,  the  rooks  and  butlers  would  havo  had  to  submit 
to  law,  but  afterwards  tlie  king  was  at  liberty  not  to  allow  that 
the  lives  of  men  were  taken  merely  for  a  culinary  otrence.  Thus 
to  forgive,  and  to  remit  the  penalty,  would  have  been  an  act  oi* 
great  mercy.  If  the  cooks  had  received  tlicir  punishment,  but  were 
not  put  to  death,  tln*y  would  have  completely  changed  for  the 
future.  The  king  condoning  a  small  ofl'enee,  and  sparing  the  lives 
of  tlie  poor  devils,  would  have  felt  all  riglit,  and  not  been  sick. 
But  he  did  nothing  of  that  sort.  Fie  ate  perl'orre  something 
obnoxious  to  his  health.  Allowing  his  butlers  to  remain  igno- 
rant of  their  fault,  he  lost  hm  royal  dignity,  because  he  did 
not  repress  their  bad  condu«rt.  This  was  objectionable  in  the 
first  place. 

If  cooks  and  butlers  in  preparing  a  dish  do  not  make  it 
sweet  or  sour  enough,  or  if  an  atom  of  dust  no  bigger  than  a 
louse,  hardly  perceptible  or  visible  to  the  eye.  falls  into  the  salad, 
if  in  such  a  case  a  sovereign  in  fixing  a  penalty  takes  into  con- 
sideration the  mind  of  the  offender,  and  tlierefore  abstains  from 
divulging  his  fault,  one  may  well  speak  of  clemency.  Now,  a  leech 
is  an  inch  or  more  long  and  '/10  of  an  im-h  or  more  broad.  In  a 
salad  a  one-eyed  man  must  seo  it.  The  servants  of  the  king 
showed  an  utter  want  of  respect,  taking  no  care  to  cleanse  the 
salad.  Theirs  was  a  most  serious  ofllVnce.  For  King  Hui  not  to 
reprimand  tliem  was  a  second  mistake. 

In  a  salad  there  must  be  no  leech.  If  so,  one  does  not  eat 
it,  but  throws  it  to  the  ground.  Provided  one  is  anxious,  lest  tlie 
attendants  should  discover  it,  1"'  may  liide  it  ia  his  bosora.  Thus 
the  leech  can  escape  observation.  Why  must  one  eat  it  miUe-qtw- 
cotUe?  If  something  uneatable  is  by  inadvertence  in  a  salad  so, 
that  it  can  be  concrak'd,  to  oat  it  by  fom'  is  a  third  mistakt*. 


Digitized  by  Google 


158 


Lun-Hrn-r:  B.  Meta, 山 ysical. 


] f  Heaven  had  rewarded  an  unbecoming  act,  an  unwort)iy 
person  would  have  \won  the  recipient  of  Heaven's  grace.  The  in- 
ability to  reprove  for  tlie  sake  of  a  leecli  is,  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world,  something  very  exoollent.  Now,  tliere  is  many  an  excellent 
man,  wliosc  deeds  are  similar  to  the  swallowing  of  a  leech.  If  for 
swallowing  a  leecli  【h"m、n  giants  liberation  from  sit-kness,  excellent 
men  must  always  \w  without  ailin^s.  The  virtuo  of  tliis  kind  of 
men  is,  howevor,  small  only  and  not  to  be  compared  with  the 
perfect  rhaiactcr  of  the  true  sages  and  their  guileless  demeanour. 
There  are  many  sages  who  would  push  their  kindness  of  lieart 
so  far  as  to  put  up  witli  liuinau  faults.  Yet  thv  Emperor  Wu  Wang 
was  of  a  weak  health,  and  ( 'onfucius  seriously  ill.  Why  has  Heaven 
been  so  inconsistent  in  the  distribution  of  its  1'avom'? 

It  may  be  that  after  King  //"'•  had  swallowed  the  looch,  it 
came  out  again  in  a  natural  way  of  itself.  Whenever  anybody 
eats  a  living  tiling,  it  will  inevitably  die.  The  stomach  is  hot 
inside.  WIrmi  tl"，  leech  is  gulped  down,  it  docs  not  die  instant- 
aneously, but  o、ving  to  the  liigh  temperature  of  the  stomach 
it  begins  to  move  Hence  the  pain  in  the  stomach.  After 
a  8}jort  wliih',  tlui  leech  dies,  and  tlie  paiii  in  the  stomach 
ceases  also. 

It  is  in  the  nature  of  Icochfs  to  «uck  blood.  King  Hui, s  liearr 
and  bowel  complaint  was  probably  nothing  but  u  constipation  of* 
blood.   TIhmpIoiu'  this  constipation  was  along  with  the  death 

of  tlie  hlodd-suckiiig;  animal,  .just,  as  a  men  sjjHVring  fro  in  the  skin 
disease  known  as  "  rat  "  (； an  be  cu red  by  eating  a  eat,  because  it 
is  natural  to  cats  to  cat  rats.  The  various  thiiiifs  oven'onie  one 
another.  Remedies  and  antidotes  ； ire  giv<"i  on  tht*  same  principal. 
Tlierpfore  it  (*aiinot  be  a  mattt'r  for  surprise  that  by  eating  a  leech 
a  tlisease  should  be  removed.  Living  things,  wlien  eaten,  will 
dio.  Dead,  they  invariably  como  out  in  a  natural  way.  (―、 onse- 
(inently,  tl"'  ro-appearance  of  the  h*cch  cannot  be  an  act  of 
spofial  grace. 

The  piomicr  srein^  the  kimlheartedness  of  King  llui  aud 
knowing  that  tlio  le<'cli  a  Iter  t'lik'ring  the  stomach  must  come  forth 
again,  wheu  dead,  tin- re  I  ore  bowed  twice,  ami  congratulated  tlie 
king  upon  his  not  being;  injured  l)y  his  disease.  Hr  thereby  showed 
liis  power  of  forpthounlit,  and  pleased  his  sm'ert'ign.  His  utterance 
is   in   tl"'  same  slyl«'  as  that  of  Ts'  HW, 1  who  said  tli:it  a  star 

1  Astrologer  M  the  court  of  Duke  Cliiag  of  Suny  (515-  4.M  b.c.)  who  ven- 
erated liim  like  a  god. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wrong  Notions  ahout  Happiness. 


1n9 


would  shift  its  place,1  and  nt*  the  "  (ireat  Diviner,"-  who  asserted 
that  the  earth  was  going  to  move. 

A  family  in  had  lor  tliree  generations  never  swerved 

from  the  path  of  virtiu>.  Without  any  apparent 謂 on  a  black 
cow  belonging  to  this  family  dropped  a  white  calf.  ( 'o»fncms  was 
asked,  and  said  that  it  was  a  lucky  ohhmi,  and  that  the  calf  ouglit 
to  be  sacrificed  to  the  spirits,  which  was  done  accordingly.  After 
one  year,  the  fatlier  of  the  fa  mi  I  v  became  blind  without  a  reason. 
The  cow  then  produced  a  white  calf  a  second  time.  The  father 
sent  his  sou  to  ask  ('o"fncius，  who  replied  that  it  was  a  propitious 
portent,  and  that  the  animal  must  be  immolated,  which  was  done 
again.  After  a  year,  tlie  sou  lost  his  eyo-siglit,  nobody  knew  why. 
Subsequently,  ('h  "  attacked  Suny,  and  besieged  its  capital.  At  that 
time  the  be^iegeil  were  iu  sucli  a  distress,  tliat  they  exchanged 
their  sons,  and  ate  them,  breaking  tlieir  bones,  which  tli«*y  \ised 
as  firewood.3  It  was  but  for  their  blindness  that  lather  and  son 
、vere  not  called  upon  to  mount  guard  on  tlie  city  wall.  When 
the  enemy's  army  raised  the  siege,  father  and  son  could  see  again. 
This  is  believed  to  bt'  a  proof  of  how  the  spirits  requited  great 
deserts,  but  it  is  idle  talk : ^ 

If  father  and  son  of  that  family  in  Sung  did  so  much  good, 
that  the  spirits  rewarded  them,  why  must  they  first  make  them 
blind,  and  afterwards  restore  their  sight?  Could  they  not  protect 
them,  if  tliey  had  not  been  blind  and  always  seeing?  Being;  unable 
to  lielp  men,  if  not  blind,  tlie  spirits  would  also  l)c  powerless  to 
prott'et  the  blind. 

Had  the  two  commanders  of  Sun</  and  Ch'u  made  such  a 
furious  onslaught,  that  the  woapous  were  blunted,  the  dead  bodies 
covered  with  blood,  the  warriors  captivatefl,  or  killed  never  to 
come  back,  then  blindness  might  have  afforded  an  ex«  usc  for  not 
going  to  the  front,  and  that  might  have  been  construed  as  a  divine 
protection.   But  before  the  armies  oi'  ami  Clin  came  to  blows, 

Hun  Yuan  ami  7:w  Fan*  made  a  covenant,  and  went  back.  The 
two  forces  returned  homo  unscatlied,  and  tht*  blades  of  the  swords, 
and  the  points  of  the  arrows  wore  not  blunted  by  use.   The  duty 


1  The  planet  Mars  (cf.  p.  127). 

2  The  "  Great  Diviner ''  of  ('h'i,  on  wliom  vid.  p.  1 VI. 

， This  fact  is  inrtitioned  in  tlie  S/ii-chi  rlia|>.  .'5S,  p.  14 v.  The  siege  took  place 
from  .">i>.")-51l4  n.r.  The  wliole  ,sl.»ry  seems  to  l>c  a  quotation  from  Lieh  7V  VIII,  (； v. 
or  from  Uwii  A'",'  '/>  XVFII,  G  wlio  narrate  it  with  almost  the  same  words 

*  Hua  Yuan  was  the  general  of  Suru/,  Tm  Fan  that  of  Ch  u.  Both  armies 
being  wiually  exhausted  by  famine,  the  siege  was  r;ii>ed. 


Lun  -  H«*  ntr :  B.  Metaphysial. 


of  mounting  the  city  wall  did  not  entail  dcatli,  consequently  the 
two  good  men  could  not  have  obtained  tlie  divine  protection,  while 
this  duty  was  being  performed.  In  ease  they  hud  not  been  blind 
at  that  time,  th,'y  would  not  have  (fied  either.  The  blind  arid 
the  not  blind  all  got  off.  What  Lonetit  did  those  good  men  derive 
then  from  their  blindness,  for  wliich  the  spirits  were  respon- 
sible?1 

Were  the  families  of  the  blind  alone  well  off,  when  the  State 
of  Snug  was  short  of  provisions;'  All  had  to  exchange  their  sons 
with  the  families  which  mounted  guard  on  the  wall,  ami  tlwy 
split  tlieir  hones.  If  in  such  straits  such  good  people  alone  we rc 
still  blind  and  unable  to  see,  tlie  spirits  in  giviu^  their  aid  liave 
failed  to  discriminate  justly  between  tlie  good  and  the  wicked. 

Father  and  son  liad  probably  been  blinded  l>y  exposure  to 
cold  wind,  a  mere  chance.  When  the  siege  was  over,  they  owed 
tlieir  cure  to  chance  also.  The  world  knowing  that  they  had  done 
good  works,  that  tliey  had  oHertnl  two  wliite  calves  in  sarritice, 
that  (luring  the  war  between  Sung  and  Cli  n  tl"'y  alone  had  uot 
mounted  tlie  wall,  and  tliat  after  the  siege  they  regained  their 
sight,  thought  this  to  be  the  recompense  of  virtue,  and  t!»n  pro- 
tection granted  by  the  spirits. 

Wlien  tlie  minister  of  Ch  u,  Sun  Shu  Ao^  was  a  l>oy,  ho 
beheld  a  two-lieaded  sniikc,  wliich  he  killed  and  buried.  He  then 
went  home,  and  cried  before  liis  mother.  Slie  asked  him,  what 
was  the  matter.  Me  replied  ： ― "  I  have  lieard  say  that  he  wlm 
sees  a  two-headed  snake  must  die.  Now,  when  I  went  out.  I  saw 
a  two-headed  snake.  I  am  afraid  tliat  I  must  leave  you  and  die, 
hence  my  tears."  Upon  liis  mother  inquiring,  where  the  snake 
was  now,  he  rejoined:—44  For  fear  lest  others  shrmld  see  it  later, 
1  have  killed  it  outright,  and  buried  it." 

The  mother  said:—"  I  have  heard  that  Heaven  will  recom- 
pense liidden  virtue.  You  are  certainly  not  going  to  die,  for  Heaven 
must  reward  you.''  And,  in  tact,  Sun  S/tu  Ao  did  not  die,  but,  later 
on,  became  prime  minister  of  Cli  u.  For  interring  one  suake  he 
received  two  favours.  This  makes  it  clear  that  Heaven  rewards 
good  actions. 

1  According  to  Ufh  Txe  and  Huni  ]\'<m  Ttt  tlie  two  blind  men  wer«,  in  fact, 
saved  from  death  l>y  their  blindness.  Lieh  'I'm  he.  cit.  adds  tliat  over  half  of  the. 
defenders  of  the  i"ity  wall  were  killed,  and  Huni  'V"n  Tm  says  that  all  except  tlie 
two  blind  men  were  massacred  by  the  besiegers.  Wnny  ( 'h'umj  follows  the  Shi-chi 
in  hia  narrative  of  tlip  salvation  of  the  city. 

'l  "lli  cent.  b.(、. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wrong  Notions  nhont  Happiness.  Ifil 

No,  it  is  idle  talk.  That  he  who  sees  a  two-headed  snake, 
must  die,  is  a  common  superstition,  and  that  Heaven  gives  happiness 
as  a  reward  for  hidden  virtue,  a  common  prejiulice.  Sun  Shu  Ao, 
fonvinced  of  the  superstition,  buried  tlie  snake,  and  his  mother, 
addicted  to  tht;  prejudice,  tinnly  relied  on  the  heavenly  retaliation. 
This  would  amount  to  nothing  else  than  that  life  and  death  were 
not  depending  on  fate,  but  on  the  death  of  a  snake. 

T  ieii  WAn 1  of  ('fi'i,  IVince  of  Meni/  ( liamj,  w  as  born  on  the 
5th  day  of  the  5tli  moon.2  His  father  T  ien  Yiuy  expostulated  with 
liis  mother  saying,  why  do  you  rear  liim?  Slit?  rqil"'(l: ― 44  Why 
do  you  not  、visli  to  rear  a  iil'tli  iiKintli  child *  7'  ieti  Yiny  said  ： ― 
" A  fifth  month  son  will  become  as  high  as  a  door,  and  kill  h«)tli 
liis  father  and  mother."  She  rejoined  ： ― "  Does  the  human  fate 
depend  on  Heaven  or  on  doors?  If  oti  Heaven,  you  have  nothing 
to  cumplaiu  of,  if  on  a  door,  he  must  become  as  high  as  a  door. 
Who  ever  attained  to  that  '；'"  3 

Later  nn,  T  im  MVh  grew  as  high  as  a  door,  but  7'  ten  Ying 
did  not  die.  Thus  the  apprehension  to  rear  a  child  in  the  fifth 
month  proved  unfounded.  The  disgust  at  the  sight  of  a  two- 
lieaded  suake  is  like  the  repugnance  to  rear  a  child  of  the  fifth 
month.  Since  the  father  of  such  a  child  did  not  die,  it  follows 
that  a  two-headed  snake  cannot  bring  misfortune  either. 

From  this  point  of  view,  he  who  sees  a  two-headed  snake, 
does  not  die,  as  a  matter  of  course,  but  not  on  account  of  having 
buried  a  snake.  If  for  interring;  one  snake  om'  receives  two  fa- 
vours, how  many  must  one  obtain  for  ten  snakes?  Sun  S/m  Ao  by 
burying  a  snake,  lest  other  persons  should  took  at  it,  showed  an 
excellent  character.  The  works  of  excellent  men  do  not  merely 
consist  in  burying  snakes.  Situ  Shu  Ao  may  have  acromplislied 
many  other  meritorious  acts,  before  he  buried  the  snake.  Endowed 
with  a  good  nature  by  Heaven,  people  do  good  under  all  circum- 
stani'es.  8uoh  well  deserving  persons  ouglit  to  see  propitious 
things,  instead  of  that  he  unexpectedly  falls  in  witli  a  snake  that 
kills  man.  Was  pcrliaps  Sun  S/tu  Ao  a  wicked  man,  before  he 
beheld  the  snake,  and  did  Heaven  intend  to  kill  him,  but  condoiiecl 
his  guilt,  and  spared  his  life  upon  seeing  him  burying  the  snake? 


1  Died  279  b.c. 

a  This  day  is  still  now  regarded  as  very  unlucky  in  many  respects,  although 
it  be  the  Great  Summer  Festival  or  the  Dragon  Boat  Festival.  On  tl"，  reasons 
cf.  Of  Groot,  U，  Fr'tef  unnutlleA  ,''  Kmoui.  Vol.  I,  p.  320. 

3  A  quotation  from  the  Shi-cfti,  chap.  75,  p.  2v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 


Lun -Hong:  B.  Metaphysical. 


A  stone  is  hard  from  the  time  of  its  formation,  a  fragrant 
flower  has  its  perfume  from  the  time,  wlien  it  came  out.  If  it  be 
said  tliat  Snn  S/m  Ao's  virtue  l)ccaine  manifest,  wlien  lie  buried 
the  snake,  tl»en  he  would  not  have  received  it  from  Heaven  at 
his  birth. 

The  Coufudanist  T uuy  Wn  Ihin  and  the  M^hist  Ch  an  T<e 1 
met,  and  spoke  about  T"(>.  Ch  an  Tse  extolled  the  Moliist  theory 
of  the  help  of  the  spirits,2  and  as  an  instance  adducod  duke  Mu 
.of  Ch  in.  His  excellent  qualities  were  so  brilliant  tliat  God  granted 
liiin  an  age  of  ninety  years.3 

CUan  Tse  gets  into  tnmblo  with  Yno  and  Shun,  wlio  were  not 
lavourt'd  witli  a  long  lif'i',  and  I 'hi eh  and  (  7iou,  w  ho  did  nut  die 
young.  Yu",  >'/'"",  ('/"eh,  and  C/tou  beloug  to  remote  antiquity,  but 
in  iiHxlern  times  likewise  duke  Mu  of  (7i  in*  and  duke  Wm  of  Chin 5 
are  difficult  to  account  lor. 

The  posthumous  name  expresses  man's  actions.  What  he 
has  done  during  his  lifV-time,  appears  in  his  posthumous  title. 
Mu  is  an  fx  press  ion  for  error  and  disorder,''  WAn  means  virtue 
and  goodness.  Did  Heav,'n  ivwanl  error  and  disorder  with 
long  years,  and  take  the  life  of  liiin  who  practised  virtue  ami 
benevolence  ? 

The  rei^n  of  Duke  Mu  did  not  surpass  that  of  Duke  MV«  of 
Chin,  and  tlie  latk'i's  posthumous  title  was  better  than  that  of 
Duke  Mu.  But  Heaven  did  not  extend  \\\'u  of  Cfiin's  life,  he 
only  granted  longer  years  to  Duke  Mu.7     Thus   the  retribution 

I  A  scholar  of  the  //"«  time. 

•J  Dt'iiKui.s  and  spirits  wlio  reward  the  virtuous,  and  punisli  tli«»  perverse, 
play  an  important  part  in  tl"'  dcM  triiic  of  Mr  '/'».  (Ct\  Fubfr,  Miciu*,  Elberfeld 
1877.  p.  91.) 

3  The  parallel  passage  in  diap.  XXVII  speaks  of  nineteen  extra  years,  with 
which  the  Duke  was  rewarded. 
*  G5H-619  b.c. 
5  G34-«52<5  b.c 

II  The  Mu  in  the  Duke  of  Cft'in'/i  name  ―  docs  not  mean :  error  and 
disorder,  it  .signifies  ：  ―  majoNtic,  grand,  adininihle.  But  tliis  Mu  is  often  replaced 
by  the  character  ^j^l,  wliicli  lias  the  bad  meaning  given  by  U  rmy  ( 'h  ung.  I  pre- 
sume that  in  the  original  t<?xt  of  the  Lnn-lo'ng  the  latter  character  was  used,  whereas 
w (！  now  read  the  otlicr.  In  tlie  jtitrallcl  passage  chap.  XXVII  Jpl  ^  is  actually 
written,  and  so  it  is  in  the  Shi-chi  eli;i[).  5,  p.  Dv.  et  seq. 

7  The  Shi-chi  knows  notliing  of  such  a  inirafle.  Duke  Mu  was  a  great 
warrior  as  waa  Duke  Wen,  but  the  latter's  rule  is  described  by  Sm  Ma  Ch'im  as 
very  enliglitened  and  beneficial.  (Cf.  on  Duke  Mu  ：  -  <  hacatmes,  Mnn. 
Vol.  II，  p.  25 -4\  a„d  u.,  Duke  WVn.  Vol.  IV,  p.  2<U  -oOS.) 


Digitized  by  Googl 


Wrong  Notions  about  Happiness. 


163 


ol"  Heaven  would  appear  as  capricious  and  perverse  as  Duke  Mn 
liimsplf  was. 

Under  heaven  tlie  good  men  are  few,  aiul  the  l>ad  ones  many. 
The  good  follow  right  principles,  the  bad  infringe  Hoavon's  com- 
inands.  Yet  the  lives  of  bad  men  arc  not  short  tlwrefore,  nor  the 
years  of  the  good  ones  prolonged.  H<»w  is  it  that  Heaven  does 
not  arrangf  tliat  tlie  virtuous  always  enjoy  a  life  of  a  hundred 
years,  and  that  the  wicked  die  young,  or  through  their  guilt? 


Digitized  by  Google 


104 


I.uti-Hf*ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


CHAPTER  XII. 
Wrong  Notions  on  Unhappiness  {Uuo-hsii). 

Since  what  the  world  calls  happiness  and  divino  grace  is  be- 
lieved to  be  tlie  dutcoino  of  moral  oonduct,  it  is  also  a  comiiuui 
belief  that  tlic  victims  of  inisiortum*  and  disgrace  arc  thus  visited 
btH-anse  of  their  wickedness  Tliose  sunk  in  sin,  and  steeped  in 
iniquity  Heaven  and  Earth  puuisli,  and  tin*  spirits  retaliate  upon 
them.  These  |"'tialt"'s，  whetlier  lu»avy  or  light,  will  be  enforced, 
and  the  retributions  ol*  tlio  spirits  roach  far  and  near. 

I'se  Ilsia  1  is  related  to  have  lost  his  sight,  wliile  mourning  lor 
his  son.  Tseng  Tae'1  by  way  of  condolenci'  wept.  7W  JLs'm  there- 
upon exclaimed  "O  Heaven,  1  was  not  guilty!"  T.stUig  T.se  gre、v 
excited,  and  said  "  In  w  liat  way  are  yon  innocent,  S/mn</?  "3  I  s<'rved 
our  master  witli  you  betw  een  tl"1  ( 'lm 4  and  tlie  S,sh,  but  you  retired 
to  tlie  region  above  the  West  Hiver,5  whore  vou  lived,  until  vou 
gre、v  old.  You  misled  tlie  j>eo[)le  <»i*  tlj<*  West  River  into  the  belief 
that  you  \\  ere  equal  to  the  master.  That  、va«  your  first  fault. 
Wlien  niouriiing  tor  your  parents,  you  di*l  nothing  fxtraordinary. 
tliat  people  would  talk  about.  That  was  your  second  fault.  But 
in  your  ^rief  over  your  son.  you  lost  your  evo-si^lit.  That  was 
your  third  fault.    How  dare  you  say  tliat  you  arc  not  guilty?', 

'A,'  U.sUi  threw  away  liis  stair,  went  tlowi^  on  liis  knees  and 
said,  "I  have  failed,  1  have  1  ailed  ！  1  liave  left  human  society,  and 
also  led  a  solitary  life  for  ever  so  long."" 

Thus  Tse  I hin  having;  lost  liis  sight,  l\stii(j  7:、y>  reproved  liim  lor 
liis  faults.  Tae  H、:i"  threw  away  his  stick,  and  bowed  to  Tseng  lWs 
words.  He«*aiise,  as  they  say,  【l'*avi'n  really  punishes  tlie  guilty, 
tlieroi'oro  evidently  his  eyes  lost  their  sight.    Having  thus  humbly 

' A  disciple  of  ( onfiicitut. 

s  One  of  the  most  faiiious  disriplcs  of  (  onfuchix,  wliose  name  lias  been  con- 
nected with  the  aulliorshij)  of  tlie  (ireat  Learning. 

3  Pu  Shoju/  was  the  name  of  l^e  I  hin.    TV  Hmi  is  liis  style. 

4  A  .small  river  in  the  [)rovince  of  ^haniung,  flowing  into  tlie  ». 
Presumalily  the  western  course  ol"  the  Yellow  Kiver. 

c  Quoted  from  the  Li-ki,  T  un  h'uny  1  (cf.  Legyes  translation,  Sacred  Hooka 
of  the  East  Vol.  XXVli,  p.  135). 


Digitized  by  Googl^ 


Wrong  Notions  on  Unhappincss. 


1  »；5 


acknowledged  his  guilt,  he  is  reported  to  have  regained  his  sight 
by  degrees.  Every boily  says  so,  nevertheless  a  thorough  investiga- 
tion will  show  us  that  this  belief  is  illusory. 

Loss  of  sight  is  like  loss  of  hearing.'  Loss  of  sight  is  blind- 
ness, and  loss  of  hearing,  deafness,  lie  wlio  suflers  iVom  dcafnfss, 
is  not  belie vod  to  liav«、  faults,  therefore  it  would  be  erroneous  to 
speak  of  guilt,  ii*  a  man  becomes  blind.  Now  tlio  diseases  of  tlie 
ear  and  the  eye  arc  similar  to  those  of  the  heart  and  the  stomach. 
In  case  tlie  ear  and  tlie  eye  lose  tlioir  faculties,  one  speaks  of  guilt 
perhaps,  but  can  any  fault  be  inferred,  when  the  heart  or  the 
stomacli  an'  sick  ？ 

Po  Nhi  was  ill.  ( 'onfiirin^  grasped  his  hand  through  the  window 
saying  "It  will  kill  him,  such  is  Ins  fate ！  Such  a  man  to  get 
siu;li  a  disease ！ *' 1  Originally  ('""/"<';，"、'  spoke  oi"  Po  A7"'.*  bad  luck, 
atul  therefore  pitied  him.  Had  J'o  AV«  *  guilt  hern  the  cause  of  his 
sickness,  tlu*n  Heaven  would  have  punislied  him  for  his  wickedness, 
and  he  would  have  been  on  a  level  witli  Tse  Ihin.  In  that,  case 
('onfnciui<  ought  to  have  exposed  his  guilt,  lis  Tmhig  Tse  did  with  T<e 
Hyia.    But  instead  he  spoke  of  fate.    Fate  is  no  fault. 

Heaven  inflicts  its  punishments  on  man,  as  a  sovereign  does 
ou  his  subjects.  If  a  man  thus  rhastisiMl,  submits  to  the  punisli- 
ment,  the  ruler  will  often  pardon  him.  Tse  ll、、Ui  admitted  his  guilt, 
humiliated  himsrlf,  and  repented.  TliiTt'lbre  Heaven  in  its  cxtrt'me 
kindness  ought  to  have  cured  his  blindness,  or,  if  7'w  ILsias  loss  of 
sight  wa-s  not  a  retributitm  from  Heaven,  7:w  Ihi/i  cannot  have  been 
thrice  guilty. 

Is  not  leprosy  much  、vors(、  than  blindness? 】f  hv  who  lost 
his  sight,  had  three  faults,  was  then  the  leper2  ten  times  guilty? 

Yen  Yiuin 3  died  young  and  T"'  Lu  came  to  a  premature  end, 
being  chopped  into  minced  meat.*  Thus  to  be  butchered  is  the 
most  horrid  disaster.  Judging  from  Tse  Jh  'ui's  blindness,  both  Yen 
Yuan  and  Tse  Lu  must  have  been  guilty  of  a  liundred  crimes.  From 
this  it  becomes  evident  that  the  statement  of  J^ng  Tse  was  pre- 
posterous. 


1  Quotation  of  Analects  VI,  8. 

a  Po  AVu,  who  was  suffering  from  leprosy. 

3  The  favourite  disciple  of  (  onfiicht^,  whose  name  was  Yen  Hut. 

4  The  TM-chttan,  Hook  XII  Duke  Ai  15th  year,  relates  that  T»e  Lai  was  killed 
iii  a.  revolution  in  Wei,  struck  with  spears,  no  mention  being  made  of  his  having 
been  hacked  to  pieces  (cf.  Legge,  Chun  (  h  iu  Pt.  II,  p.  h<42).  This  is  related,  however, 
in  the  U-ki,  T  an-kung  I  {Ugge  Sacred  Books  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  123)  and  by  lluai 
JScm  Tst  VU»  13v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


l  i;r, 


Luti-IIrng:  B.  Metnplivsical. 


Tse  fhi/t  lost  his  sight,  while  bp\\  ailing  lii?s  son.  The  feplinp^s 
1'or  one's  children  an*  fominon  to  mankind,  whereas  thankfulness 
t')  one's  j)art'nts  is  soint'times  lon'tnl.  Whon  7V<-  Ihia  was  mournins: 
lor  his  father  and  motlu'r,  |)iM)ple  <lid  not  notice  it,  but,  wlu-n 
bewailing  his  son,  lie  losl  his  sight.  This  shows  tliar  his  de- 
votion to  lii.s  paivnts  was  rather  weak,  hut  that  \u\  passionately 
l<»v<*d  liis  son.  ('onsiMjuently  lie  sliti«l  innumcrabU*  tears.  Thus 
ceaselcsslv  weeping,  he  exposed  liiniself  to  the  wind,  and  became 
blind. 

Tsnu)  7!n>'  followini;1  tlie  connnon  prejudice  invented  three  faults 
tor  7:"'  llsia.  The  latter  likewise  stuck  to  tlie  popular  belief.  He- 
<'ausc  lie  liad  lost  his  sight,  lie  humbly  aoknowledgod  Lis  guilt. 
Neither  T^ng  'I'm-  nor  7:"'  I  hi"  could  f;et  rid  of  those  popular  ideas. 
Tlim'lVirc  in  arguing,  tliey  did  not  rank  very  high  among  Confuchis 
followers. 

King  Hsiaiiff  of  1  sent  a  sword  to  Vu  C/ii,2  who  their- 
upon  was  going  to  coinmit  Miii<'i<le,  falling  on  the  sword.  "  How 
liave  1  oircnded  Heaven?,"  ipiotli  he.  Alter  a  long  while  he  re- 
joined:—" At  all  events  I  must  die.  At  the  battle  of  i'Kaug- 
/f  '"(/3  tho  annv  oi'  t'l"，o、  several  Inuulred  thousaml  men,  surrcn- 
<lered,  but  I  dfoeived  them,  and  causod  them  to  be  buried  alive. 
TluTt'lbrc  1  deserve  to  (1"、."  Afterwartls  he  made  away  witli 
liiinsoli'.4 

Po  Ch  i  、va^  well  aw  are  of  his  former  crime,  and  acfjuiesc«'<l 
ill  tlie  punishmrnt  coiisecjucnt  upon  it.  Me  ktio\\ ,  how  In*  liimsclt* 
liad  failed,  but  not,  \\  hy  the  soldiers  of  Chao  were  buried  alive. 
II'  II«'avrn  really  liad  punished  the  guilty.  、、'lmt  ofTence  against 
Heaven  had  tlie  soldiers  of  Chao  committed,  who  surrendered ？  Had 
they  been  wounded  and  killed  on  tlie  battle-field  by  the  random 
blows  of  weapons,  many  out  of  the  lour  hundred  thousand  would 
rertainly  lmve  survived.  Why  were  these  also  buried  in  spitf  of 
tln'ir  goodness  and  innocciuro?  Tl"w  soldiers  being;  unable  to  ob- 
tain Heaven's  protection  througli  tlieir  virtue,  wliy  did  Vo  C/t  i  alomi 
sulTer  thf  oondi^n  punisliineiit  lor  liis  crime  iVoni  Heaven?  Wf  set' 
from  this  that  Po  C/t  i  was  mistaken  in  what  he  said. 

' Kii^r  f  l,  ao  Ihinm,  of  (  A  hi  ：5()."»-240  B.C. 

- A  famous  gfiirrai  of  the  <  h  in  State  who  hy  treachery  annihilated  the  army 

of  ( luio  vid.  ！).  vm. 

3  In  S/itimi. 

4  Po  I  h  i  had  i'allfii  into  diNl'avour  with  liis  liei;e  tijion  rcl'tiMiif;  to  lead  anotJier 
campaign  against  '  %io. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wrong  Notions  on  Unlia|>piues.s. 


167 


The  Ch  in  emperor  Krh  Shih  Huang  Ti  1  sent  an  envoy  to  Mhxj 
7'  ten,2  and  coniinanded  liim  to  miiiiuit  suicide.  Meny  '!，'；''"  heaving 
a  deep  sigh  said  "  How  have  1  failed  against  Heaven?  I  die  in- 
nocent." After  a  long  w  liile,  lie  slowly  began,  "Y<'t  I  am  guilty, 
therefore  I  am  doomed  to  die.  When  1  was  constrm'tin^  the  Great 
Wall  connecting  h'uto-tuuy 3  with  L'tn-t  ao*  ten  tliousaiul  Li  in  a 
straiglit  lin«、  1  ('o\il<l  nof  avoid  cutting  the  veins  of  the  earth. 
That  、vas  my  guilt."  Upon  this  lie  swallowed  a  drug,  and  exj)ired.5 

The  Grand  Annalist  8,<<  Ma  (7i  im  finds  fault  with  liim.  "When 
the  (7i  in  dynasty,  he  said,  liad  exterminated  the  feudal  princes,  and 
pea«*e  was  not  yet  restored  to  the  empire,  nor  the  wounds  healed, 
M^ny  T  fVvj,  a  famous  fjcneral  at  that  time,  did  not  «*are  to  strongly 
remonstrate  with  the  cniporor,  or  lielp  people  in  their  distress, 
feeding  tlie  old.  befriending  the  orplians.  or  bringing  about  a  general 
concord.  He  flattered  those  in  power,  and  instigated  them  to  great 
exploits.  That  was  tlie  fault  of  men  of  his  type,  \\  lio  well  deserved 
to  be  put  to  deatli.  Why  did  }io  mako  tlu*  veins  of  the  earth 
responsible?  "6 

If  w  hat  }Ung  T  ten  said  was  wrong,  the  strictures  of  the 
Grand  Annalist  are  not  to  tl"'  point  either.  How  so?  Mhuj  Tien 
being  guilty  of  having  cut  tlio  v*-ins  oi'  tin'  eartli.  deserved  dentil 
for  this  threat  crime.  How  did  the  earth,  which  nourishes  all  beings, 
wrong  man ？  Mhuf  '1、'",、  who  cut  its  veins,  knew  very  well  tliat 
by  doing  so  lie  had 議 imitte(l  a  crime,  but  he  did  not  know,  wliy 
by  lacerating  tl"、  veins  of  the  eartli  he  had  made  himself  guilty.7 
Therefore  it  is  of  no  consequeiKT,  whether  Meng  Tien  thus  im- 
peached himself,  or  not.  The  Clrand  Annalist  blames  Mcny  T  ien 
for  not  having  strongly  protested,  wlien  he  was  a  i'amous  general, 

' 209-207  b.c. 

- A  general  of  Erh  Shih  Huang  Ti's  father,  t  'h'in  Shih  Huang  Ti,  who  fought 
successfully  against  the  fhiung-nu,  and  constructed  tlie  Great  Wall  as  a  rampart  of 
defence  against  tlieir  incursions. 

a  The  Manchurian  province  of  Frng-t'ien. 

*  A  city  in  Kutufu  at  the  western  extremity  of  the  Great  Wall. 

1  Quoted  from  the  S/u-chi  chap.  SS.  p.  5. 

fi  Remarks  of  Sw  Ma  C'h'ien  to  Shi-chi  chap.  NS，  p.  5v. 

7  The  earth  is  here  treated  like  an  animated  being,  and  its  wounding  by 
digging  out  ditclies  for  tlie  eartli-works  nujuisite  for  the  Great  Wall,  and  by  piercing 
inountuins,  is  considered  a  crime.  But  provided  that  Mnig  T'ien  suilered  the  puiiisl 卜 
incnt  of  his  guilt,  tlien  another  dillieulty  arises.  Why  did  Heaven  allow  Kartfi  to 
l>e  thus  maltreated,  why  did  it  punisli  innocent  Earth  ；'  \V>mg  Ch'ungs  solution  is 
very  simple.  Heaven  neither  rewards  nor  punishes.  Its  working  is  spontaneous, 
unpremeditated,  and  puqjo>eless.  Mnty  T  ten's  deatlt  is  nothing  but  an  uufeliri- 
toua  accident. 


Digitized  by  Google 


168 


Lim-Hriia;:  B.  Metapliv-sical. 


that  tlierefore  he  met  with  tliis  disaster,  for  those  that  do  not 
speak,  when  they  ouglit  to  nMnonstrate,  will  liave  to  suflVr  a  vio- 
lent death. 

>'.、',' M<i  ('It  ien  Inmself  luul  to  sull'er  tor  Li  Ling  in  the  \\  arm 
room.1    According  to  tl»e  Grain  I  Annalist's  own  tlie  inisfortunc 

suffered  tells  against  a  peixon.  Cousi'quently  capital  putiisluuent  takes 
[ilace  by  Heaven's  decire.  II"  .s'.>y  Ma  t'li  censures  Mentf  T  i*-n  lur 
not  huviiiii  strongly  reinoustrated  with  liis  sovereign,  wherel'ort*  lie 
incurred  liis  disaster,  tlien  ti»m'  must  liavo  been  something  wroiiij 
about  liiiUMioli'  likewise,  since  lie  was  put  into  the  warm  room.  If 
lie  was  not  、、Tong,  then  his  ci'iticisins  on  Menif  T  im  art1  not  just. 

In  liis  ineiuoir  on  l>，、  Yi -  the  Grand  Annalist,  giving  examples 
of  good  and  bad  actions  says,  "  ( hit  of  liis  seventy  disciples  ( 'ou- 
fiu-iiis  only  reroiiinu'iuled  Ym  Yuan  for  liis  anient  love  of  Icaniino-. 
Yet  Yen  Yuan  wns  often  destitutr.  He  lived  on  bran,  of  whicli  he 
«'«>ul<l  not  even  eat  liis  fill,  and  suddenly  died  in  his  prime.  Does 
FIt'aven  re\\  ard  good  men  thus.' " 

" Robber  Ch^  assassinated  innocent  j)e<»j)le  day  al't»*r  day.  and 
ate  their  flesh.  Iiy  his  savagenoss  and  iiuposing  haughtiiiess  he 
attractoil  several  thousand  followers,  witli  whom  lie  scourged  the 
i"npiiv.  Yet  he  attained  a  very  jjro.-it  age  after  all.  Wliy  was  he 
so  specially  lavoured?" 

Yr/i  Yuan  ouglit  not  to  liavc  dit'd  so  jin'maturoly.  and  r(>l_'l"'r 
( 'lie  sljould  not  have  been  kept  alive  so  lonj>.  Not  to  wonder  nt 
Yen  Ywm's  |»reiiiaturc  deatli.  but  to  w,*v  that  Mtny  T  teu  deserved 
to  die,  is  inconsistent. 

Tlics  Ihm  general  Li  Kumnjz  said  in  a  conversntion  w  liich  lie 
had  with  tlie  divinpr  1「,〃',/  "Ever  siuc-e  the  Han 4  liave  t  ought 
tlie  H4umj-nu}  I  was  t\wre.    Hut  several  tons  of  officers  of  a  lower 

1  For  his  intercession  in  favour  of  the  defeated  geiiei'al  Li  Liny  the  emperor 
、V"  Ti  condomtied  Ss,  Ma  ( 7,'im  to  castration,  which  penalty  was  inflicted  upon 
!iim  in  a  warm  room  serving  l'or  tliat  pur|>o>c.  (Cf.  (  fiaratmt's,  Mtm.  Hixtorujiiex 
Vol.  I.  p.  XL.) 

2  S/ti-c/ii  chap.  HI,  p.  3v.  l，o  \  i  (12tli  cent,  h.c.)  and  liis  elder  brother  '、•/'"  (:hi 
were  sons  of  tlie  Prince  ol'  Ku-vhu  in  modern  Chili.  Tlieir  lather  wished  to  make 
tlie  younger  brotlier  Sim  Chi  his  heir,  but  he  refused  to  deprive  his  elder  brother 
of  his  birth-right,  who,  on  lii.s  part,  would  not  ascend  the  throne  against  his  father's 
will.  Both  left  their  country  to  wander  about  in  the  mouiitaiiis,  where  at  la«t  they 
died  of  cold  and  hunger.    Tliey  are  regarded  as  models  of"  virtue. 

s  Died  125  b.c. 

*  The  H<in  dynasty.     The  Former  Han  dynasty  reigned  from  2<  »♦>  n.r.  25  a.ik 
tlie  Later  Jlun  d)ii;isJ_\  lroin  '2b  22<'  a.d, 
' A  Turkish  tribe. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Wrong  Notions  on  Unhapjiiness. 


rank  than  commamW  of  a  city  gate,  witli  sc.nrrelv  moderate  abil- 
ities, liave  won  laurels  in  tlie  campaigns  against  tlu*  J  fit 1  and  mar- 
quisates  withal.  I  do  not  yield  the  palm  to  these  nobl«>s,  l)iit  how 
is  it  tliat  I  have  not  even  acquired  a  square  loot  '"•  land  as  a 
reward  of  my  services,  and  much  less  been  enf'oofled  with  a  city? 
Arc  ii ly  looks  not  those  of  a  manjuis?    Surely  it  is  my  late." 

Wauy  Site  nskod  him  to  tliink,  whetlior  tliero  、vajs  anything 
whicli  always  gave  him  |iaii<*s  of  conscience.  Li  Kwinff  replied, 
" When  1  was  magistrate  of  //'〃'•</-/,.、-/, 2  tl»e  r/' 3  continuously 
rebelled.  1  induced  over  ei^ht  liundred  to  submission,  and,  by  a 
stratagem,  had  tliein  all  killed  on  tlie  same  ilay.  Tliis  is  the  only 
tiling  for  whicli  1  (ev\  ！ sorry  uj>to  now 

Watty  She  rejoined  ：  ― *'  Tliere  can  In*  no  greater  crime  tlian 
to  murder  those  that  have  surrendered.  Tliat  is  tlie  reason,  why 
you,  general,  did  not  get  a  marquisate." 4 

Li  Ktmng  agreed  with  him,  and  others.  、v】io  l"、ar(l  ot'  it,  be- 
lieved tliis  view  to  be  true.  Now,  not  to  become  a  marquis  is  like 
not  becoming  an  enijH»ror.  31nst  he  \vln>  is  not  made  a  marquis, 
have  anything;  to  rur,  and  lie  、、- Ii"  does  not  become  emperor,  have 
committed  anv  wrong?  (''"tf''"'""  was  not  made  an  (Miij)eror,  but 
nobody  will  say  of  him  that  In*  had  done  any  wrong,  whereas, 
because  Li  Ktinny  did  not  become  a  marquis,  Wo/kj  S/it'  said  that  lie 
lia<l  something  to  repent  of.    But  liis  reasoning  is  wrong. 

Those  who  go  into  these  (juostions.  mostly  hold  that,  whether 
a  man  will  be  invested  with  a  nian(uisate  <»r  not,  is  predestinated 
by  Heaven,  and  that  marks  of  Heaven's  fate  appear  in  his  body. 
When  the  great  general  VI V/  Cliiu(jh  w  as  in  tlie  Chien-chang  [>alace, 
a  deported  criminal  with  an  iron  collar  predicted  liis  fate  to  tlie 
ell'ect  that  he  was  so  distin»ui^lie«l,  that  \w  would  cveu  be  made 
a  marquis.  Later  on,  lie  in  fact  beranit'  a  marquis  over  ten  thou- 
sand families,  owing  t<>  his  great  services.  BH'ore  HW  C/i'ing  liad 
IH'rfonned  his  great  achievcmpiits,  the  deport »'d  criminal  saw  those 
signs  pointing  to  his  future  rank.  (Onsequently,  to  be  raised  to 
the  rank  of  a  marquis  depends  on  fate,  and  man  cannot  attain  to 
it  by  his  works.  AVliat  tlie  criminal  said  turned  out  true,  as  sliown 
by  the  result,  wliereas  Wany  Slu' *»  assertion  is  untenable  and  with- 
out proof.    V<" 了  often  pe»)))le  arc  perverse  and  sclfisli  without 

1  A  general  term  for  non-Chinese  tribes  in  the  north. 

2  District  in  Kanm. 

3  Tribes  in  tlie  West  of  China. 

4  A  ijunUtion  from  Shi-vhi  chap.         p.  6,  the  biography  of  General  L, 
3  A  favourite  and  a  general  of  Han  Wu  Ti,  died  100  n.f. 


Digitized  by  Google 


170 


Lint  -  Hrug:  B.  Metaphysical. 


benoming  unhappy  by  it,  and  others  who  always  follow  the  path 
of  virtue,  may  lose  tlieir  happiness.  Wang  Slip's  opinion  is  of  the 
same  kind  as  tl"，  sell-reproach  of  I'o  Ch  i  and  the  self-impeadimfiit 
of  M^ny  7，  teti. 

In  this  flurried,  bustling  world  it  constantly  happens  that 
people  rob  and  murder  each  other  in  their  greed  for  wealth.  Two 
merchants  having  travelled  togetlier  in  the  same  cart  or  the  same 
boat  a  thousand  Li,  one  kills  the  other,  when  they  arrive  at  a  tar- 
ofl*  place,  and  takes  away  all  his  property.  The  dead  body  is  left 
on  the  spot,  uncared  for,  and  the  bones  blepch  in  the  sun  unburied. 
In  tlie  water,  the  corpse  is  eaten  up  by  fish  and  turtles,  (m  laud, 
ants  and  vermin  feed  upon  it.  The  lazy  fellows  won't  exert  their 
strength  in  agriculture,  but  resort  to  commerce,  and  even  that  re- 
luctantly, in  order  to  amass  grain  and  goods.  When  then  in  a 
year  of  scarcity  they  have  not  enough  to  still  the  hunger  of  tlieir 
bellies,  they  knock  down  their  fellow-citizens  like  beasts,  cut  them 
to  pieces,  and  eat  (heir  flesh.  No  did'erenct'  is  made  between  good 
and  bad  men,  they  are  all  equally  devoured.  It  is  not  generally 
known,  and  the  officials  do  not  hear  of  it.  In  communities  of  over 
a  thousand  men  up  to  ten  thousand  only  one  man  out  of  a  hundred 
remains  alive,  and  nine  out  of  ten  die.1  This  is  the  height  of  lawless- 
ness and  atrocity,  yet  all  the  munlerers  walk  publicly  about,  become 
wealthy  men,  and  lead  a  gay  and  pleasant  life,  without  Heaven 
punishing  them  for  their  utter  want  of  sympathy  and  benevolence. 

They  kill  one  another,  when  they  meet  on  the  roads,  not 
because  tlioy  arc  so  poor,  that  thvy  cannot  undertake  anything,  Imt 
only  because  they  are  passing  through  hard  times,  they  feed  on 
human  flesh,  thus  bringing  endless  misfry  on  their  fellow-creatures, 
and  compassing  their  premature  deaths.  How  is  it  possible  that 
they  can  make  their  guilt  public,  openly  showing  to  the  whole 
world  the  indelible  proofs  thereof?  Wauy  -、'  opinion  can  certainly 
not  be  right. 

The  historians  tell  us  that  Li  Ssc,2  envious  that  linn  Fei  Tse 8 
equalled  him  in  talent,  liad  liim  assassinated  in  jail4  iu  Ch'in,  but 

1  A  Chinese  does  not  tnke  exception  to  the  inroiigruily  of  the  equation:— 
100:1  二  10:  I.  The  nicaiiiiig  is  plain:  — a  aiiinll  percentage  of  survivors,  and  a 
gre;il  many  dying. 

- Prime  Minister  of  Ch'in  Shih  〃,,,/".,/  7V  and  a  great  scholar.  He  studied 
ingetlMM-  with  H'm  Fri  7V  under  the  |)liiln>opher  H"i"  TV. 

A  A  Taoist  pliilosophcr,  son  cif  a  duke,  of  the  Han  Stair'. 

4  By  liis  intriijucs  Li  . 、'化 liad  indured  th,、  kinp  of  ( '/•  in  to  imprison  Han  Fei 
7V.  He  tlien  scut  him  poison,  witli  vvliicli  〃""  Fn  /'.、>•  commitied  Miicide.  Vid. 
Shi-cki  chap.  Go,  p.  1 1  v.,  Biograpliy  oi  Han  Fei  2V. 


Wrotig  Notions  on  Unl"，p|"iie、、 


171 


that,  afterwards,  he  was  torn  to  pieces  by  carts, 1  furthermore'  that 
S/tang  Yang,2  under  pretence  of  his  olil  fiirndship,  captured  A，ig， 
prince  of  Wei,  but  that,  subsequently,  lie  had  to  suffer  death.  Tliey 
wish  to  imply  that  those  men  had  to  endure  theso  misfortunes  as 
a  punishment  for  tlieir  having  destroyed  a  wise  man,  or  broken  an 
old  friendship.  For  wliat  cause  had  Hnu  Fei  7:"，  given,  to  be  in- 
carcerated by  Li  Sse,  or  what  fault  had  prince  Any  committed,  to 
be  taken  prisoner  by  Sluwy  Yang'}  How  did  the  murdor  of  a 
solu>lar,  \\\\o  died  in  prison,  and  the  breaking  of  an  old  friendship 
resulting  in  the  arrest  of  the  prince,  bring  about  the  violent  death 
f»f  the  culprit,  torn  to  pieces  by  carts,8  or  the  decapitation?  If 
Hau  Fei  Tse  or  prince  Any  、v('iv  wicked,  and  Heaven  had  placed 
retribution  in  the  hands  of  [J  8>r  ami  S"n"y  Yang,  then  the  latter 
would  have  acted  by  Heaven's  order,  and  be  deserving  of  his 
reward,  not  of  misfortune.  Were  Han  hel  Tst'  and  prince  Ang 
blameless,  and  not  punished  by  Heaven,  then  Li  Sse  and  S/iang 
Ynnff  ought  not  to  liave  imprisoned  and  captured  them. 

It  will  be  argued  that  Han  Fei  Tse  and  Prinw  Any  had  con- 
cealed their  crimes,  and  】ii(lden  tlieir  i'aulfs  so,  that  nobody  heard 
about  tlietn,  but  Heaven  alone  knew,  and  thorffore  they  sulVered 
death  and  mishap.  The  guilt  (，f  ram  consists,  eitlicr  in  outrages 
on  the  wise,  or  in  attacks  on  the  wcll-inimled.  If  they  commit 
outrages  on  the  wise,  what  wrong  have  tlie  victims  of  these  out- 
rages done?  And  if  they  attack  the  well-minded,  wliat  I  a  ul  t  have 
the  people  thus  attacked  commit '.' * 

Wlien  misery  or  prosperity,  ibrtu ne  or  mishap  are  falling  to 
man's  share  with  greater  intensity,  it  is  fate,  when  less  so,  it  is 

1  Li  Sxe  fell  a  victim  to  tlic  intrigues  of  the  powerful  cunucli  《'hao  Kno. 
Tlie  Shi-c/ii  chay.  S7,  |>.  '2f  >v.,  Hiogniphy  of  Li  S.、f，  relates  that  lie  was  rut  asundfr 
at  the  waist  on  the  market  place.  At  all  events  lie  was  executed  itt  an  atrocious 
way.  The  tfaring  to  pieces  hy  cart.s  driven  in  opposite  directions  is  ； i  punisliment 
several  times  mentioiied  in  tlie  (  It  mt-cliiti. 

- Sh  in;/  Yang  is  Wei  Y>mg,  Prince  of  >'/,"".,/.  died  n.c.  In  the  .sen  ice  of 
tlie  ( 'hin  State  lie  d«-fpat«;d  m\  army  of  WV/,  coiiintandfil  by  I'riuoe  A wy,  whom  lift 
tfea«*|ier(»U)<lv  seized,  and  nssasNtnated  at  a  encetini;.  (n  which  li'.'  had  iiivitt*«l  liim  as 
aii  old  friend.  According  to  the  Shi-chi,  diap.  G>,  p.  \),  Hiography  of  Prince  Shatuj. 
he  lost  life  in  battle  agniust  his  luniitT  master,  and  liis  t-orpse  wa-s  Uirn  to  pieces 
by  carts  like  Li 

a  The  culprit  beiiif,'  bound  lo  tlie  carts,  which  then  wen"  'iriveii  in  diffcreni 
directions. 

4  Why  docs  Heaven  piuii.Nli  the  iiutocciil  tlirougli  the  guilty?  If  Hon  Fei  T.<r 
and  Ant)  had  sinned  in  M'rrtM,  Hiniv.ii  would  liavr  I'eeii  uiiju>t  towards  iIiom:  they 
had  wronged,  and  no  on. 


Digitized  by  Google 


172 


I.uii  -Hrng:  B.  M<*tapliysical. 


time.  T  ni  Kung 1  was  in  great  distress,  when  lie  happened  to  be 
tnifeofled  witli  a  territory  hy  the  ( 'Iwn  king  II V//  Wang.  Ning  ('ft  i2 
was  living  in  obscurity  and  difficulties,  when  Duke  Kuan  of  Ch  i 
gave  him  an  appointment.  It  cannot  be  said  tliat  tliese  two  men, 
wlien  tlu'y  wert*  poor  nnd  miserable,  had  done  wrong,  but  had 
reformed,  wlien  they  obtained  tlieir  investmont  or  appointment. 
Calamity  and  prosperity  have  their  time,  and  good  or  bad  luck 
depend  on  fate. 

T  ni  Kung  and  Xing  Ch  i  were  worthies,  but  tliey  may  have 
lind  their  faults.  Sages,  howevor,  possess  perfect  virtue.  Never- 
theless S/mn  was  several  times  almost  done  to  death  by  the  foul 
play  of  liis  fatlier  and  hrotlier.3  W  hen  he  met  witli  Yao,  tlie 
latter  yielded  the  throne  to  liim,  and  raised  him  to  tlie  imperial 
dignity.  It  is  evident  that,  when  S/»un  had  to  endure  these  in- 
sidious attacks,  he  was  not  «to  blame,  and  tliat  he  did  not  behave 
well,  when  1"，  was  made  emperor.  First,  ]iis  time  1ia<]  not  yet 
come,  afterwards,  his  fate  was  fulfilled,  and  his  time  came. 

When  princes  and  ministers  in  olden  days  were  first  distressed, 
and  afterwards  «*rownpd  with  suctress,  it  was  not,  because  they  had 
at  first  been  had,  and  Heaven  sent  tliem  calamities,  or  tliat  sul)- 
sequently  they  suddenly  improved,  and  then  were  helped  and  pro- 
tected hy  tlie  spirits.  Tho  actions  and  doings  of  one  individual 
from  his  youth  to  his  death  boar  the  same  ch.nractor  from  lirst  to 
last.    Yet  succeods,   the  other  fails,  one  ^vts  on,  tlie  other 

falls  off,  one  is  penniless,  tlie  other  well-to-tlo,  one  thriving,  the 
other  ruined.  All  this  is  tl">  result  of  cliance  and  luck,  and  tin* 
upshot  of  fate  and  time. 

1  A  high  officer,  wlio  liad  gone  into  exile  to  avoid  the  tyrannous  rule  ol 

Chou  limn  1  \Tl  n.c.  and  subsequently  joined  W'm  Wong. 
， 3mv  (  hi  lived  in  the  7th  cent.  b.c. 
3  Cf.  p.  17.i. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Auspicious  Portents. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
Auspicious  Portents  {Chi-ym). 

Wlionever  men  are  preclfstinated  lor  something  grand  by 
Heaven,  auspicimis  jiortents  arc  soen  on  Earth.  Wlien  siu-h  appear 
on  Earth.  Heaven's  destiny  is  at  work.  Tliere  art'  (lirtVi't'nt  kinds 
of  omens,  either  do  lln'v  appear  in  tlu*  men  themselves  or  tliey 
arc  lueky  signs,  or  take  the  form  of  a  soi'l  of  halo. 

lluoiKj  7V  is  rejiorted  to  have  been  an  embryo  lor  20  months, 
l>elore  he  was  born.  Alter  birth  his  intelli^eiu-e  was  marvellous. 
Weak  as  lie  was,  lie  could  already  speak.  Wlu-n  he  w  as  fuU-gro、vn， 
he  took  the  lead  oi'  all  tlu'  feudal  princes,  who  subniitUnl  to  liis 
sway.  He  taught  tl"'  bears  to  figlit,  and  tlius  dftVated  Yen  Ti, 
who  was  completely  routed.  His  nature  was  di  He  rent  from  that 
of  other  people,  tlierefore  lie  remained  tor  ton  months  longer  in 
his  mother's  womb.  Being  |)mlt's<ined  to  become  emperor,  lir 
taught  tlie  rrearuns.  and  they  were  subservient  to  him. 

Yao's  body  was  like  the  sun,  wlicu  closely  ins|K*<  ted,  viewed 
at  a  (listaiHo,  lie  appeared  like  a  cloud.  Wlien  the  great  Hood 
rose  up  to  tlu-  sky,  and  snakes  and  dragons  did  mischiof.  Yno  em- 
ployed 17/  for  llio  n'gulati"n  of  the  water  and  the  oxjmlsion  of 
tlie  suakos  and  dnigons.  water,  when  regulated,  flowed  east- 

ward, and  snakes  and  <1  radons  abscoiuh'd.  His  bones  were  ab- 
normal, thenre  tlie  cxtraonliiiarv  events.  As  he  was  cndoAved  with 
a  wonderful  inlelirct.  portents  appeared  in  things.  Since  by  late 
he  was  to  become  noble,  lie  ascended  the  imperial  throne  as  a 
marquis  oi'  7*  any. 

Previous  to  his  ineetini;  with  Yao,  S/tun  was  living  unmarrifd 
in  a  nasty,  out-of-tlio-\v;iy  Ku  Son 1  together  with  llsiang 2 

attempted  to  kill  liim.  They  l)ade  liim  complete  the  building  of 
a  granary,  and  kindled  a  lire  untlerneatli.  They  (lim'ted  him  to 
dig  a  well,  and  then  thry  throw  oartli  down  from  above.  Shun 
contrived  to  get  out  of  the  granary  unhanned  by  the  fire,  and 
to   make  his  escape  from  rht-  well  hy  one  side,   unlmrt  by  tlie 

1  The  harsh  and  unfeeling  lather  of  tlie  virtuous  Shun. 
， Chun's  wicked  brotlier. 


Digitized  by  Google 


174 


Liin-Hong:  Fi.  Metaphysical. 


earth.1  When  Yao  hoard  of  this,  lie  suinmoiK'd  liim,  and  gave  him 
an  office  on  trial.  Slu,"  (illed  his  post  with  great  credit,  and  no 
disorder  occurred.  He  would  enter  a  ！ solitary,  big  lorest  without 
being  pounced  upon  by  tigers  and  wolves,  or  bt'ing  bitten  by  vipers 
or  snakes.  In  tho  midst  of  thunderstorm  and  a  gushing  rain-showtT 
lie  <lid  not  go  astray.2  Men  bent  upon  his  assassination,  could  do 
him  no  harm,  ami  、vil<l  birds  and  reptiles  witli  venomous  stings 
were  unable  to  avouihI  liim.  Sutltleuly  In*  attained  imperial  s\\  ay, 
and  mountetl  the  tlirouc  of  tlic  son  of  heaven. 

Prior  to  Ibm  (7<i  * 3  time,  his  motlicr*  walked  upon  the  loot- 
step  of  a  giant.  Others  ！ say  tliat  she  put  on  7V  A«  •> 5  clothes,  or 
that,  she  rested  in  ■'/，'•  Kn  s  placi*.  At  all  events,  slic  became  en- 
ceinte with  a  cliilcl,  which  she  cast  jnvay  in  a  narrow  alley,  re- 
garding it  as  an  ill  omen.  But  oxen  and  horses  did  not  dare  to 
tread  upon  it.  She  placed  it  on  ice,  but  the  birds  trovered  it  with 
their  wings.  From  all  tliese  auspicious  signs  converging  on  the 
baby's  body,  the  mother  learned .  what  wonderi'ul  qualities  it  pos- 
sessed. Thereiore,  she  b rought  it  up.  W  hen  ll"u  ('hi  hud  attained 
to  manhood,  lie  assisted  Yao,  and  rose  to  the  rauk  of  a  minister  of  war. 

Tlie  W'u.yun^  Prince  bearing  the  surname  of  K  nn  Mo  I  tad  liis 
i'atlier  slain  by  the  //、■— /-"",7  and  、vas  himself  tlirown  into  the 
de.sert,  still  alivr.  The  birds  iVd  liim  on  llesli,  wliich  tlioy  carried 
in  their  beaks.  The  S/ian  },rt8  、v"s  amazed  at  this,  whicli  appeared 
to  him  suju'rnatural.  He  took  care  of  the  boy,  and,  when  he  had 
grown  strong,  he  gave  him  a  military  post.  Alter  lie  )>ad  won 
many  laurels,  the  S/tau  Yn  put  the  people  rormerly  obeying  liis 
fatlier  again  undor  Kun  .1/o'v  conimarul,  and  dim-ted  liim  always 
to  guard  the  Western  City." 


1  Cf.  Menchu  Book  V，  Pt.  I,  chap.  II  {Legge  p.  222-22H)  and  Shi-chi  chap.  I,  p.  23. 
a  Vid.  Hcing  Pt.  II.  Book  I,  chap.  II. 

3  A  mythical  personage,  tlie  "  Lord  of  the  Grain,"  said  to  have  been  Director 
of  Husbandry  under  Yao  and  Shun. 

*  The  word  mother,  required  Uy  the  context,  nmst  be  supplemented  in  the 
original. 

*  A  legendary  emperor  prior  to  Yao,  Hou  (Jhi's  father,  after  one  tradition. 

n  A  Ktrghis  tribe  settled  in  the  N.  K.  of  Ffrghavn  in  the  2nd  cent.  B.C.  (67"- 
chi  cliap.  123,  p.  4). 

7  The  powerful  Turkish  tribes,  which  were  China's  northern  neighbours  during 
the  Iltm  time,  perhaps  the  Huwi.  Long  wars  were  waged  between  the  Chinese  and 
the  Hmtng-nu. 

n  The  title  of  the  chieftain  of  the  llsiung  nu. 

0  This  [MHsage  is  takrn  Almost  literally  from  the  Shi-clii  rhHp.  123,  p.  9v. 
Tl"，  S/ti-c/u  .still  adds  that  K  un  Mo  was  surkled  hy  a  ylic-wolf. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Au5pinous  Portents 


175 


Hon  Chi  was  not  to  be  cast  away,  tlu'refore  th»>  «»xen  a  nil 
horses  did  not  kick  iiim,  and  the  birds  wvm'd  and  protc<-t<'d  him 
witli  their  plumage.  K  un  Mr»  was  not  (loomed  to  die,  tlicrelorc 
tlie  birds  came  with  ilesli  in  their  beaks  to  teed  liiiu. 

A  servant  girl  of  the  king  of  T  o-li 1  of  the  northern  Yi2  was  . 
with  rhild.  The  king  wanled  t<»  kill  her.  Tlie  girl  said  by  way 
of  ajxilogy ： ― "A  vapour,  big  as  an  egg,  dt'scendod  iVom  heaven, 
and  made  me  cna'htte."  Afters  ards,  slie  was  delivered  of  a  fhiUl, 
which  ！ si  10  threw  away  into  a  pig-stye.  Tlie  pigs  snill'od  at  it,  but 
it  did  not  [>erish.  Then  it  、v:is  removed  ag.tin  to  the  horse  stable, 
in  order  that  the  horses  sliould  kill  it.  but  the  liorses  also  only 
snifn*<l  at  it,  and  it  did  not  die.  The  king  tliereupon  imagined  tliat 
tlu*  child  would  be(;oine  a  scivereign,  and  therefore  ordered  tl"、 
mother  to  take  it  back ,  ami  liad  it  nurstnl  by  his  sIhvom.  The  boy 
received  the  name  ot"  Txmy  M'mg.  He  、vas  cin]»loye(l  as  a  sht'phml 
for  cattle  and  horses.  As  he  was  an  oxct'lloiit  a  roller,  tlie  king  got 
airaid,  that  he  might  dejirivo  him  of  his  kingdom,  and  tlioreibre 
wisfied  to  kill  him.  '///«//  Miny  went  soutlnvard  to  tlie  Yen-hn  riv«.'r, 
wlioro  with  his  bow  he  shot  Hs|j  anil  turtles  in  the  water.  They 
formed  a  floating  briilge,  enabling  T">"j  Ming  to  cross.  Then  the 
fisli  and  turtles  separated  aoain  so,  tliat  the  troops  pursuing  him 
could  not  follow.  Subsequently  he  he<>aine  king  of  Fu-i/il.  Among 
the  northern  Yi  tlii'rt、  is  a  kingdom  of  Fu-yii.^ 

Wlien  Tung  Minr/s  motlior  first  becamf  prcguant,  she  j>erceivt'd 
a  vapour  (U'scondiug  from  hoaven,  when  slie  tlirew  the  newly 

born  away,  pigs  an<l  liorsos  snifled  at  him.  After  lie  had  grown 
up,  the  king  desiml  to  kill  him,  hut  the  fish  and  turtles,  which 
he  had  shot,  lormed  a  floating  bridge.  According  to  lieaven's  late 
he  was  uot  to  di<*.  tlicroloro  1"'  was  saved  from  pigs  and  horses. 
As  he  was  predestinated  to  bevome  king  of  Fu-yii,  the  fish  and 
turtles  formed  a  bridge  to  help  Iiim. 

When  yi'  Yin*  was  about  to  bo  born,  liis  mother  dreamt  tliat 
she  saw  a  man,  who  said  to  lier:  "  Water  flows  from  the  mortar.5 
Forthwith  travol  eastward."  The  mother  took  note  of  this,  and, 
on  tlie  next  morning,  found  out  tliat  really  water  camo  out  from 

1  A  State  in  »ortlienj  Corea,  Ma-tmn-lin  chap.  324,  p.  14v.,  where  our  passage 
is  quoted. 

1  Barbarous,  non  Chinese  tribes  in  the  east. 

3  In  Liaohuw/. 

4  The  rhief  minister  of  T  ont/,  tlie  founder  of  tl";  Shmif  dynasty  ITGfi  k.c. 
Many  legends  are  current  about  liis  origin. 

*  In  uncient  t  imes  holes  in  the  cart  1 1  were  used  as  mortars. 


170  Lmi  -  Ilt'iij;:  H.  Metaphysical. 

the  mortar. 1  She  went  10  Li  eastward.  When  slie  looked  back 
to  her  native  place,  all  was  un'ler  water.  >7  Yin's  dostinv  was  not 
to  be  drowut'd,  consrqucutly  his  motluT  had  a  dream,  and  \\  «-nt  away. 

Tlie  same  principle  holds  good  for  the  tity  oi'  Li-yang.'1 
Those  whose  fat"  was  like  that  of  Yi  Yin,  w  ero  certainly  roustMl 
boi'oiehan(l,  aud  removal  to  another  place  l>«'l'or«'  tin*  catastropiic. 

When  Duke  lisiaixj  o\'  Cli'i  got  into  trouble,  Duk«'  Jfuan.  t\iv 
crown-princo,  liad  to  li«;ht  lor  liis  (lirone  with  7W  C/iiu.3  Kuun 
Chung  assistc'l  '/:、('  C/iiu,  Pint  '、'/〃'. 、t(""l  by  Duke  II win.  K>um 
Chung  in  a  combat  against  (!uk<>  //,"〃'，  slmt  at  liim  w  itli  arrow  >, 
and  hit  liim  on  tin*  biuklr  of  liis  l),、lt.  Man  is  ^cnrrallv  7  leer 
hij;h,5  tin1  b<'lt  clasjis  the  、v;"M，  ； tml  thr  lmckl,*  :"t;-"'l"'d  the 
belt  rovers  only  u  spot  Irss  tluiu  an  itirli  wide.  Its  smalliu'ss 
makes  it  dinicult  to  be  Int.  M"m»v''r,  tho  |>oint»'«l  eilge  is  curlx'd 
on  its  poIislitMl  surfaco.  All  the  arrows  liitting  the  buckle  an' 
•  lefleoted.  Y»'t  Kwm  Chun*/  just  liit  flic  bucklo  in  tli，'  middle.  Tlie 
arrow  struck  against  it.  and  tlicn  fell  (low  n  \\  itho»it  deviating  into 
tht*  flesh  on  citlitT  sidt-.  Duke  lliuiii  s  t'ntc  w  as  wealth  and  honour, 
ami  a  god  liolprd  liim.  so  tliat  ihr  arrow  hitting  liis  buckle  did 
not  hurt  him. 

King  Kttny  ol*  C'h  un  had  live  soiis: ―  Tse  (;/•""、  T.se  Yil,  Tae  Kan. 
7'sr  //、-'•，  and  ( '//  i  (.'/"•，  who  all  were  much  liked  by  him.  Hut 
having'  no  son  iVoin  his  first  w  ilV,  whom  \w  inijjlit  make  his  sui*- 
ccssor,  lie  s;u'rificr«l  to  the  inountaiits  and  ri\  its.  add  invoki'd  tlu* 
(lt'cision  of  the  gods.  To'gWhcr  w  ith  his  second  wii'v  l\i  In'  buried 
a  jade  badge  in  (lie  anrrst ral  lisill,  and  bade  his  five  sons  ro  enter 
after  having  feasted,  and  make  oljeisancM*.  I  he  later  king  K  "〃,<y 
stepped  over  it,  7Vr  }'//  roaclicd  it  with  his  elbow,  7'sr  Kan  and 
'JW  //.、'》•  botli  i'(、m«'iim'(l  far  from  it.  Ch  i  Chi  was  carried  in  as  a 
baby.  With  eacli  prostration  In*  prrsst'd  on  tlie  top  of  the  jadp 
hadj^c.  Wlicn  King  Knng  died.  '/:、■''  Cluvt  becairn*  King  K  any,'  but 
liis  son  lost  the  kingdom.     Tse  Yil  becanic  King  Ling,6  but  was 


1  Namely  the  underground  water. 

2  Cf.  p.  1：5(>. 

:l  In  V)S(i  n.r.  Duke  Hsiunff  was  assassinated  by  liis  nephew  Wu  Chih  (Chun- 
ch'ht  III,  S).    I'/tf  Chiu  was  a  lirotlier  of  Duke  Hunn. 

*  Kium  Chung  and  Puo  S/iu  were  hosoiii-frieiids.  At  the  recommandatioii 
of  Pa<,  Shu 厂"， Ki"'"  ('hmg,  later  on,  entrred  into  tlie  s.'rvk'*  of  Duke  //«  /«,  whom 
lie  had  first  opposed. 

r>  The  ancient  Chinese  foot  was  much  smaller  tlian  ours. 

6  .')S!)-:)5S  b.c. 

7  W - 543  ii. r. 
s  539-527  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Auspicious  Portents. 


177 


himself  assassinated.  Tse  Kan  roigned  but  ten  odd  clays.  7:、<?  Hsi 
did  not  come  into  power,  ami  oven  was  afraid  of  being  hehoatled. 
All  were  extcnninatc<l  and  left  no  progeny.  ('Hi  ('/d  mounted  the 
throne  later,  an<l  contiimod  tlie  sacritices  of  tl"'  house  of  67/ m,  lor 
such  liad  been  tlie  presage. 1 

Tl"'  «luration  of  the  reigns  of  these  princes  corresponded  to 
the  distance  they  kt'pt  from  (lie  ja<U'  badge,  when  [irost rating 
tlu'inselvcs.  Til"  pieoe  of  jailo  was  in  tlie  eartli,  while  tlie  five 
sons,  unaware  of  it,  onlored  (""、  by  one,  and  bow  n«';m、r  or 
farther  off.  Wlicn  tl"')'  pressed  <lo\vi»  the  top  of  tlie  jade  orna- 
ment, they  were,  s(i  to  speak,  i  ml  need  by  their  spirits  to  kiicel  down. 

T  u  An  Aw  of  Chin 2  out  of  hatred  destroyed  tin-  sons  ot' 
( V#ao  T"";  Aft»*r  thf  death  of  ( 'hno  So^  his  wife  had  a  posthumous 
i-liild.  WIumi  T  u  An  Ku  1 1  ran  I  of  it,  1"'  sought  it  iu  tlio  Palace.5 
The  mother  put  it  into  her  pantaloons,  and  swore  tlie  following 
oath: ― "  The  whole  Clmo  1'amily  will  be  lost,  if  t\w  (*liil<l  cries,  it 
will  not  be  so,  if  it  docs  not  utter  a  smiml."  While  being  searclicd 
for.  it  did  not  cry  at  all.  TUvn  its  escajn*  I'oulil  be  effected,  and 
its  life  be  saved.  Ch  en<f  Yiiuj  ('It  /"  carried  it  away,  ami  concealed 
it  on  a  mountain.  During  Duko  Chiiufs  time,7  J  Ian  C/tiie/i  meutium'il 
it  to  the  duke,  、vho  to<j;etlit*r  w  itli  linn  Cldleh  raised  the  orphan 
of  Claut  to  his  former  rank,  so  tliat  he  could  rontinue  tlie  sarri- 
licial  rites  of  his  family  under  the  name  of  HV/<  T-  e.  Tlie  orpliau 
of  CIku>  did  not  utter  a  sound,  as  tliough  its  moutli  had  Invii  dosed. 
Tims  the  elevation  oi*  Wen  Tse  was  pn'iletermiiHMl  l»y  fate. 

The  mother  ol'  Han  Kno  '/:、'<、  dame  Liu,  reposed  on  the  1'anks 
of  a  large  lake,  hi  a  <  I  roam,  slie  mt»t  with  a  spirit.  At  that  time 
there  was  a  tempest  with  thun 山' r  and  liglitniug.  In  tl"'  darkness  a 
dragon  apjjeared  on  hi^h.  TIr*  son,  (."•  wliicli  she  \\  as  <lelivm''l，  lia<l 
an  excellent  character,  but  was  very  l'oiul  of  wine.  He  would  buy 
wine  on  credit  from  Mrs.  Wang  and  mother  \Yn.  \V  lien  he  was  drunk, 
he  stopped,  and  lay  down  to  sleep.  Mrs.  Many  and  mother  Wu  then 
always  saw  some  miraculous  signs  about  him.    Whem'ver  he  re- 

1  The  Shi-c/U  chap.  4D.  p.  I  I  tells  this  story  with  nearly  the  same  words, 
and  lias  taken  it  from  the  T/to-chuun,  Duke  ( 'Uwi  13th  year.  Vid.  Lojtjt,  <  'hinew 
( 'I'imcs  Vol.  V,  p.  (;50，  1st  col.  and  (  /tat  tumm,  Mnn.  HiJtloritpif  M  Vol.  IV,  p.  ； It  17. 

*  A  minister  of  the  State  of  Cftm  597  b.c. 

3  Also  a  minister  of  Chin  and  rival  of  T'u  An  Ku. 

*  Likewise  slain  by  T'u  An  Aw. 

'•'  Chao  S')'a  widow,  being  a  dauglitor  of  the  ducal  house  of  Chin,  bad  sought 
refuge  in  ihe  palace. 

0  A  faithful  adherent  of  Chao  So. 
7  598  b.c. 

Lun-Urng.  U 


Digitized  by  Google 


178 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


mained  to  drink  、viiu'，  the  price  of  the  wine  then  sold  was  mauy 
times  as  much  as  usual. 

Later  on  lie  walked  into  the  lake,  ami  cut  a  big  snake  into 
pieces  with  his  haml.  An  old  woman  filler!  the  roads  with  her 
wails,  crying  that  the  Red  Emjieror  had  killed  her  son.  This 
miracle  being  very  striking  was  much  talked  about.1 

Ch  in  SltVi  Huang  Ti  used  to  say  tliat  in  the  south-east  there 
was  the  spirit  of  a  son  of  heaven.  Therefore  he  travelled  east- 
ward in  order  to  supjiress  it.  This  was  K*io  Tsi"  spirit.  Together 
with  Lil  Hon  lie  coucealtMl  liimsell'  amidst  the  niarslu's  in  the  Mamj 
and  T  any  Mountains.2  When  Lii  Hon  with  other  people  went  in 
search  for  him,  they  always  saw  a  vapour  rising  in  a  st'raiglit  line 
above  him,  and  thus  discovered  where  he  was.3 

Later  on  AVio  Tsu  agreed  witli  Hsiang  Yii  that  whoever  first 
entered  the  gates  of  in,  sliould  be  king.  Kno  Tm  arrived  first, 
wliicli  was  deeply  resented  )>y  Ihiang  Y/'i.  Fan  T  shujx  said  ： ― 
*'  I  pray  to  look  at  】iis  vapours.  They  all  take  the  shape  of  a 
dragon,  and  liave  live  colours  ： ― tliey  are  those  ol'  the  sou  of  liraven. 
He  must  be  <les[>atclied  torthwitli." 

When  K<io  Tsu  went  to  thank  Hsiany  Yii.  \\\o  latter  and  Ya 
Fu 5  iiatcbed  a  plot  to  kill  him.  At  tlieir  instigation  Jhiany  Chuang 
perforuRHl  a  dance1  witli  a  drawn  sword,  tldnng  Vo、  who  k new 
their  intentions,  began  to  dance  together  with  lisumg  ('Inutng,  and 
no  sooner  was  the  sword  raised  over  Kno  Tsus  liead,  than  IJ>ian<j 
Po  cove  ret  I  liim  with  liis  own  hody  so,  that  the  sword  did  not 
fall.  an<l  the  munlcrous  pit".  、vas  not  carriocl  out."  At  one  time, 
Kao  7:、'/  was  rescued  l>v  <  'hany  Linmj  and  Fan  K  uai,'  and  after 
all  got  ofl'  unhurt.    Tlu'ivu|»ou  Ik'  swayt*<l  (he  、、- hole  eiiij>ire. 

When  his  mother  coiuH'ived  liim,  the  spirit  of  a  dragon  ma4e 
its  appearancv.  Wlion  he  grew  u|>,  |"'i'uliai'  clou<ls  w  eiv  seen  about 
tlic  winr  ！ sho|».  During  the  night,  he  killed  a  snake,  and  the 
snake's  old  mother  lamented,  and  cried.  Ch' in  S/u'ii  Huang  Ti  and 
L'u  llou  syw  an  aureole  above  liim.  Ilsiauy  Yii  planned  liis  assassina- 
tion, but  Il、i"n(j  I'o  protected  liim,  and  the  sicheme  tell  through. 


1  Cf.  the  detailed  account  given  in  Chap.  XVII. 

3  The  Many  Mountains  were  situiileil  in  finnan,  the  T' "ng  Mountains  in  Katunt, 

3  These  myths  about  the  first  emperor  of  the  linn  dynasty  are  related  in 
almost  the  same  words  in  the  S/ti-chi  cliap.      p.  I  v. 

4  Tlie  fHiriuiiM  4'omisellor  of  Kno  Tsus  rivaJ,  / hiuntf  I'd. 
" The  title  of  Fun 

0  The  story  is  told  more  in  detail  in  the  Shi-chi  chap.  7,  p.  14 v. 

7  Partisans  of  Ku»  Tea,  wlio»e  autccai*  is  to  a  great  extent  due  to  tlieir  efforts. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Atispirious  Portents. 


179 


Ho  found  snoli  helpmates  as  Chnug  Lumy  and  Fan  K'uai.  For 
there  being  signs  pointing  to  his  future  wealth  and  honour,  all 
things  obeyed  him,  and  men  lent  him  their  help  and  support. 

A  younger  brother  of  the  Kmprt'ss  Dowager  7 on, 1  of  the 
nainc  of  KuniKj  Kiw,  was,  at  the  a««'  of  4  or  5  years,  robbed  from 
liis  poor  family,  ami  sold,  lii>s  people  not  knowing  his  whereabouts. 
Mon-  than  ten  times  lie  was  sohl  again  to  otlier  families,  till  he 
came  to  I-i/angr  There  he  went  on  tlie  liills  for  his  master  to 
make  charcoal:-  Wlien  it  grew  cold  at  night,  over  a  lumdred 
people  lay  <lo\vn  utuler  tlie  coal.  The  coal  t',)lla!wl,  an<l  all  were 
triislietl  to  death,  save  Kiuiikj 八'" 仏 、vlio  managed  to  escaj»e.  He 
tlu-n  divined  liiniself,  and  ascertain«'<]  that,  al'ter  a  certain  nunibor 
of  days,  he  would  l)e  made  a  marquis.  Ho  left  his  home,  and 
betook  himself  to  (-'/"〃'〃-"". 3  There  lie  learned  that  the  Kmpn'ss  Ton 
!ia<l  lately  settled  lior  family  at  Knnn-rhin  in  Ch  ing-ho.A  He  reported 
himself  to  tlie  emperor.  Tlie  Einj>ress  Dowager  prevailed  upoti  Ching 
Ti  to  grant  liim  an  amiienct'.  What  lie  replied  to  the  questions 
about  liis  origin  proved  true,  and  the  emjx'ror  made  him  rich 
presents.  At  the  accession  of  Wm  7V,5  Kuany  Kim  was  created  a 
marquis  of  Chuny  Wu.  \V  hen  the  coal  heaps  came  down,  more 
than  a  liundred  people  >\  ere  killed,  only  Knany  Kno  esca[)eil.  Being 
preserved  by  fate  tor  wealth  and  hunour,  lie  did  uot  only  keep 
alive,  but  was  made  a  marquis  to  boot. 

Yd  D-e  In,  a  native  of  Tung  Ktmn  in  (It  en -fin ft  came  into  the 
world  at  night.  His  mother  lieli'.'l'l  soiucthing  like  a  skein  of  silk 
over  him,  which  wewt  up  to  lieaven.  Sh«»  asked  other  people  s  advice 
a  bout  it.  All  were  agreed  that  it  was  an  auspicious  fluid  foreboding 
liojiour,  which  readied  up  tohea ven.  Yfi  'J'.sr  T",  whcngrowii  up.  beea me 
an  official,  and  was  [troinoted  to  tlie  rank  of  Minister  of  Education. 

huouff  Wen  l\> 7  from  /'  a- fan  *  in  Jlo-tung9  was  likewise  born 
about  midnight.    At  that  time  some  one  called  his  father's  name 

1  The  wife  of  the  emperor  Wm  Ti,  179-150  b.c,  and  the  mother  of  Ching 
Ti,  156-140. 

2  A  district  in  Honanfu. 

3  The  capital  under  the  former  Han  dynasty. 

4  Ching-ho%  a  State  in  Honan,  the  present  prefecture  of  K，"i-f，'ng-f",  of 
which  Kuan-chin  formed  a  district. 

r'  Probably  a  misprint  for  Wu  TV:  for  VV'«  '/',，  not  ^  Ti  succeeded  Chmj  Ti. 
r>  In  K， （"•png-fu  (Honan). 

7  The  T 'ui-ping-yu-lan  fjuotiu^  thi>»  pu^age  writes  T  ang  Wt'^n  Po.  Nothing 
more  is  to  be  learned  about  this  person  from  the  cyclopedias. 
n  The  modem  P'u-chmi  in  ShanM. 
fl  Literally  ：  -  tlie  country  east  of  the  (Yellow)  Kiver. 

\2* 


Digitized  by  Google 


ISO 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


from  without  doors.  Tin?  father  wont  out,  and  replied,  but  nobody 
was  to  be  st't'n,  only  a  big  wooilcn  stick  was  planted  uext  to  the 
door.  He  undorstood  well  that  it  was  iliiTcrent  from  common  ones. 
The  lather  took  the  stick  into  liis  house,  and  showed  it  to  some- 
body, who  prognosticated  ihe  future  from  it,  saying: ― •*  A  lucky 
omen,  indeed.  When  K，"mg  Wen  Po  is  grown  up,  he  will  study, 
and  in  his  official  Career  be  appointed  prefect  of  Kitang-han.',,i  Kuang 
Wm  Po  was  to  be  wealthy  and  honoured,  there  lore  liis  father  was 
presented  with  tlie  stick.  The  diviner,  as  it  were,  implied  that  the 
stitrk  represented  tin*  strength  of  the  child. 

On  the  day  Chia-tse'1  in  the  twelfth  moon  of  the  first  year 
Cltien-p  h>g,3  when  the  Emperor  Knang  Wu  Ti  saw  the  light  in  the 
second  hall  of  the  seraglio  in  the  rear  of  the  Chi-yang  palace,4 
his  lather  was  magistrate  of  Chi-yany.^  During  the  night  this  room 
was  lighted  of  itself  without  there  being  any  fire.  His  father 
suinmoiu'tl  the  secretary  Ch  ung  Lait,  aiul  despatched  him  to  consult 
a  fortune-teller.  For  that  purpose  67/  ung  Lnti,  accompauied  by  th«* 
groom  Su  Yung,  went  t<)  Wany  Vh  any  Sun's  place.  Wang  Clt  aug  Sun 
said  to  the  two: 一 "That  is  a  lucky  thing,  I  cannot  say  more." 
Tliat  same  year  a  blade  of  grain  grew  among  house-leek  and  uall- 
pepjxT.  It  liad  three  roots,  one  stalk,  and  nine  cars,  and  was  by 
to  two  feet  liigher  than  a  common  one,  it  beiug  an  auspicious 
blade.0 

At  the  bpgiiininji'  of  Yuan  Ti 's 7  reign  a  phenix  alighted  on 
tin'  Chi-ijnng  kung.  Hence  there  exists  still  to-day  in  the  Clti-tjaug 
palare  a  |>lionix  cottage.  Yuan  Ti  together  with  Li  Fu  and  others 
travel knl  into  the  region  ol'  On  the  road  they  fell  in  with 

insurgents,  and  greatly  alarmed,  fled  to  the  old  cottage  of  C/ti-i/ang. 
When  tln-y  arrived,  tljev  behfld  a  red  glare  like  fire  just  south 
from  tlu'  road  leading  to  the  old  cottage.  A  stream  of  light  went 
up  to  lieaveu,  and  after  a  moment  was  gone. 


1  An  ancient  name  of  the  region  about  Ch'enij-tu  and  T'ung-ch'uan  in  Ste-ckuan. 

2  The  first  number  of  the  sexagenary  cycle. 
»  G  2  b.c. 

*  This  palace,  once  used  by  the  Emperor  ll(m  Wtt  Ti  as  a  travelling  lodge, 
)»ad  l"'e"  closed.  Ka"ny  W"  Ti  'a  lather  finding  hU  yaiueii  too  wet  to  live  in,  had 
moved  into  the  old  palac«,  and  installed  himself  in  the  halls  at  the  back. 

" The  modern  T'tno-c/um-fu  in  Shaixtung, 

fl  (、f.  T'in-p'intj-yu-i,H  (Kuang  Wu  Ti)  wliere  the  Tung-ktftn  Ilun-chi  is  quoted. 

7  Hun  I'tKin  7 V  4S  ：；42  b.c.  The  Tung-kuan  llan-chi  relate*  that  the  phenix 
came  down  at  the  hirtli  of  Kuang  Wu  Ti,  H  b.c. 

8  \u  old  name  of  T  m-an-h*ien  in  Shuntuny. 


zed  by  Google 


Auspicious  Portent 


isi 


At  Wang  Mnuy  s  time,  tlie  I.ortl  Marshal  Su  /'o  A  could  dis- 
tinguish the  currents  of  air.  W lien,  on  an  embassy,  he  passed 
through  the  suburb  of  Ch  uong-liuy.1  lie  found  the  air  very  brisk 
and  frcsli.  Kttang  W'u  Ti  came  to  /fo-pin,2  w  here  lie  liad  an  int<M- 
view  with  Su  Vo  A.  IIo  put  to  h\m  the  ijurstion :  How  did  you 
know  that  a  lucky  wind  was  bl«)\ving,  minister,  when  you  passed 
C/tr uany-Ung?" 一 "  Ouly  because  I  saw  the  air  brisk  and  fresh  "  was 
<S'"  Po  A  s  reply- 
Ergo,  when  by  Heaven's  dem'e  a  new  man  is  to  rise,  and  a 
wise  emperor  to  come  forth,  the  manifestations  of  tho  original  fluid 
before  aud  after  can  clearly  be  made  out.3  But,  when  there  is 
only  a  succession  of  power,  and  -  a  continuation  of  former  institu- 
tions, insomucli  as  the  latter  serve  a  ba^is,  tlicti  tl"*  nianilVsta- 
tions  of  the  heavenlv  fluid  are  not  worth  mentioiiiiijr.*  W hen  there 
is  a  complete  revolution,  and  a  new  dragon  rises,  ho  starts  from 
very  small  beginnings,  and  passes  first  th rough  all  sorts  ol*  calamities, 
as  in  the  case  ol'  Flan  Kao  Tsu  and  Kuany  Wn  7,/.5  Were  tliey  not 
ushered  in  with  wonderful  signs  irom  heaven,  men«  and  spirits,  and 
great  splendour? 

1  A  city  in  Ilonan. 

2  Under  the  Han  a  district  "  nortli  of  the  Yellow  River,"  corresponding  to 
the  modern  P  ing-lu-fuHen  in  Shawti, 

1  In  case  of  a  great  political  revolution. 

4  In  case  of  regular  succession,  the  .son  following  tlie  father. 

5  Both  founders  of  new  dynasties. 


Digitized  by  Google 


182  Luu  -  Il/np:  B.  iMetiiplivsiroI. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
On  Divination  (Pu'shih). 

The  world  brlievcs  in  divination  with  sliells  and  weeds.  Tlic 
first  class  of  di\  inors  (jin'stion  Heaven,  tlioy  say:  the  s«m*oii(1.  Kartli. 
Milfoil  lias  soinethirif;  spiritual,  tortoisrs  arc  divine,  and  omens  ami 
signs  respond,  when  asked.  T  1m*  if  To  re  tlicy  disrt'guv<l  the  ndvice 
of  their  friends,  and  take  to  divination,  thry  iiegltvt  what  is  right 
and  wrong,  and  trust  solely  to  lucky  :m(l  unlurky  j)orttMits.  In 
their  belief,  Heaven  and  Earth  really  make  their  wishes  known, 
and  \v«»ods  mid  tort<Mscs  verily  pnssrss  spiritual  pmvrrs. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  diviners  do  not  ask  Heaven  and  Karth. 
nor  have  \\tw\s  or  lortoisrs  spiritual  qualities.  That  tlicy  have, 
and  tliat  II raven  and  Earth  arr  Ix'iiifj;  interroiratcd,  is  an  idea  of 
coininon  scholars.    How  can  、vt、  prove  tliat'.' 

7:"'  Lu  asked  ('"/'/•'"•'"-、  saying,  "  A  pi^'s  ysluiuMi-r  an<l  a  si i cop's 
Ifi;  can  serve  as  omens,  and  from  ('m'pers,  rushes,  straws,  and 
duckweed  、、- 1'  van  foreknow  山' stiiiy.  Wliat  m'，'d  is  tliciv  thou  (or 
milfoil  and  tortoises? " 

*  That  is  not  <-orn'Ct.'  said  r— 〃  '•".、，  '  for  tlicir  "aim's  ar,'  es- 
srntial.  Tl"、  milfoil's  iianu*  nwaws  old,  and  the  tortoise's,  aged.1 
I"  order  to  olucidate  (loubtl'ul  things,  one  must  ask  the  old  and 
the  aged.'  - 

A  coon  ling  to  this  rqily.  milfoil  is  not  spiritual,  and  tlie  tortoise 
is  not  tlivinc.  I'r"m  tlic  fact  that  ini|"»rtam't、  is  attached  to  tlu-ir 
naincis.  it  docs  not  follow  that  tlicv  n-ally  possess  sm-h  qualities. 
Since  they  clo  not  possess  tlios*'  <|ualiti<'s.  we  know  tliat  tliey  ;m' 
not  «rit'to(l  w  itli  supernatural  |»o、v,'rs，  uikI.  as  tliry  do  not  possess 
these,  it  is  plain  that  II raven  and  Eartli  cannot  be  asked  tlirougli 
tlicir  medium. 

Moreover.  、vht'iv  arc  the  moutlis  and  the  ears  of  Heaven  and 
Kartli.  tliat  they  may  1"'  (iiirstioncd?    Heaven  obeys  tht*  same  laws 

1  A  gratuitous  etymology,  of  which  the  Chinese  are  very  fond.  Shih  ^ 
= milfoil  and  kut-i 龜 - tortoise  have  nothing  whatever  lo  do  with  ch'i  二  old 
and  km 舊 ~-  aged. 


、- 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Divination. 


183 


as  man.  To  form  a  conception  of  Heaven,  we  must  start  from  liuiuun 
a  Hairs.  When  \\v  ask  anybody,  we  cannot  learn  liis  opinion,  unless 
w  e  see  liim  ourselves  ln'fort*  us,  ami  [H'rsonally  address  him.  If  we 
wish  to  ask  Heaven.  Heaven  is  high,  and  its  oars  arc  far  away 
from  us.  Provided  that  Iloaven  lias  no  t'ars,  it  is  iticorporoal,  and 
bt'ing  incorporeal,  it  is  air.  How  could  air  like  clouds  and  fog 
s|)eak  to  us? 

By  milfoil  tlioy  ask  the  Earth.  Earth  lias  a  body  like  man, 
hut.  as  its  ears  arc  not  near  us.  it  cjinnot  hear  us,  and  not  hoar- 
iui;  us,  its  muutli  tlocs  not  spoak  to  us.  In  line,  if  they  speak 
of  questioning  Heaven,  Heaven  bcinj;  air  cimnot  send  funens,  and, 
it.  tliey  address  tlicmst'lves  to  Karth,  tlif  <'ars  of  Kartli  are  far,  and 
cannot  lioar  us.  What  reliable  ji roofs  an*  tliore  for  the  assertion 
that  Heaven  and  Karth  speak  to  man 

We  are  living  Ix'twron  Heaven  and  Karth,  as  lico  do  on  tlie 
liuman  body.  If  tliosc  lire,  desirous  of  learning  man's  opinion,  were 
«'initting  sounds  near  his  car,  lie  would  not  liear  thorn.  Why'.' 
Because  rliere  is  such  an  rnornious  (lifTerence  of  sizo.  tliat  tlioir 
utterances  would  mm""  inaiuiibU'.  Now,  lrt  us  suppose  that  a 
j)igmy  likt*  a  mau  puts  qm'stions  to  Ilea vt'n  aud  Kartli,  which  are 
so  iinim'nw:  how  rouM  tin*)- ，川山 、rstai"l  liis  words,  atxl  how  becoim* 
acquainted  with  liis  wishes? 

Some  maintain  that  man  carries  the  fluid  of  Heaven  and  Earth 
in  his  bosom.  This  fluid  in  the  body  is  the  mind,  1  dan'say.  Whon 
man  is  going  to  divino  by  weeds  and  slu'lls,  lie  puts  questions  to 
the  milfoil  and  tlir  tortoise.  Tli«'  n*plics  wliicli  be  heurs  with  his 
ears,  his  miiul  regards  like  its  own  tlioufjlits.  From  the  dcptli  of 
tlie  bosom  and  the  stomacli  the  mind  hears  the  c.\|»lanation.  Thus, 
when  the  tortoise  is  rut  to  pieces  1  and  the  diviiiin»  stalks  grasped, 
oinens  ami  signs  appear.  Man  thinks  with  his  niind.  but  wlicti  in 
his  thoughts  lio  cannot  arrive  at  a  decision,  ho  consults  the  milfoil 
aud  tlie  tortoise.  In  case  tlu'ir  omens  and  si^ns  liarmonizo  with 
the  thoughts,  tin*  mind  may  be  said  to  have  a  good  advisor. 

Yet  it  ha|i|K'iis  that  thv  Jieart  regards  sottiftliin«r  as  leasable, 
but  the  omens  an»l  —is  are  inauspicious,  or  theso  are  felicitous, 
but  the  heart  i-onsi<lfrs  them  as  unlucky.  Now.  the  thonijlits  are 
one's  own  spirit,  and  tliat  wliich  causes  the  omens  and  signs  is 
also  one's  spirit.  In  tlie  bosom,  tlie  spirit  of  a  body  bei'oim's  the 
mental  power,  and  outside  the  bosom,  omens  and  si^ns.    It  is,  as 


， From  Chunng  Tw  cliap.  2»;，  p.  4v.  it  appears  tliat  for  divining  purposes  tlie 
tortoise  sliell  used  to  be  cut  into  It  pieces  or  diviuiiig  slips. 


Digitized  by  Google 


184 


Lun-Hcup:  B.  Mctaplivsiciil. 


if  a  man  enters  a  house,  and  sits  down,  or  goes  out  through  thv 
door.  Tlie  walking  and  sitting  makes  no  (lifforence  in  Ins  ideas, 
and  oiiteriui;  or  issuing  not  cliango  his  IVelings.  Provided  tliat 
tl"'  mind  produces  miir'iis  and  signs,  tliey  would  not  he  opjiosed 
to  man's  thoughts. 

Ilea  von  nixl  Earth  have  a  body.  tluTt'tort*  tliey  <，a.n  move.  In 
so  far  as  tliey  rati  move,  tliey  ar«'  like  living  beings,  and  boiny; 
alive,  tliey  resemble  mau.  To  ask  a  living  man,  we  must  use  a 
living  jkm'soii.  then  we  can  be  snr«'  of  a  reply.  Should  we  employ 
a  tlrad  man  lor  tliis  purjiosr.  wv  、、.<>ul(l  certainly  not  obtain  an 
answer.  \ow.  Hea\ en  and  Earth  arc  botli  alive,  and  milfoil  ami 
tortoises  are  <le;xl.  How  could  \vc  elicit  a  reply  by  asking  the 
living  tlinm^li  the  drad I  I 10  shell  of  a  <lrio<l  tortoiso  ami  tlie 
stalk  of  a  、vitl"T"<l  \\  cim I  art'  supposed  to  (j^ucstioti  living  Ileav«*ii 
and  Karth ！  Ergo  the  common  assortii>u  that  Heaven  and  Earth 
respond  is  quite  erroneous. 

It'  milfoil  and  tortoises  !»'  like  tahN'ts,  omens  aiul  signs  would 
n-prescnt  tlie  written  rharacters  tl"'m»ii，  and  resetul)lo  tin*  instruc- 
tions emanating  from  a  prince.  But  where  would  be  the  moutlis 
and  the  oars  of  II('av，'n  and  Karth.  that  such  instructions  mijjht 
be  [lossiblo?  •' Ho、v  can  IIcav«Mi  speak?"  said  (  on/mms.  "  Tlu*  four 
seasons  roll  on.  and  tlie  various  things  arr  jiroduco (！. " 1 

llt'av,'n  docs  not  spi'ak.  nor  does  it  hear  what  men  say. 
Heaven's  natun-  is  said  to  he  s|,ont:mt、ify  ami  non-intcrCfrence.  Now, 
if  [K'oplf  ijiiestion  Heaven  ami  Kartli.  and  t\wy  n*spotul.  this  n'- 
sponsf  would  re(|uire  that  intcrfercner  be  《'ouple(l  with  spontaneity. 

Armnling  to  the  text  of  tlie  l-kiuy,  the  art  of  grasping  tl"' 
straws  consists  in  sortini>-  tliein  into  two  parcels  to  resemble  Heaven 
and  Earth,  in  grasping  tliein  by  fours  in  imitation  of  tlie  four 
seasons,  and  in  returning  the  superfluous  straws  as  an  emblem  of 
an  intercalary  montli.2  Thw  rrstMiiblanct's  are  marked  with  tlie 
object  oi'  forming  the  necessary  number  of  diagrams,  and  not  a 
word  is  said  about  Heaven  and  Kartli  conjointly  replying  to  man. 
It  is  usual  arnona;  men  to  answer.  、vli，'u  asked,  and  not  to  reply, 
unless  tlion*  l>,'  any  屮 mstion.  Should  anybody  kum'k  at  other 
people's  door  without  any  reason,  not  wi siting  anything,  or  make 
a  useless  discoui-so  in  their  presence,  without  asking  their  opinion, 
tlie  master  of  tho  liousc  would  laugh,  but  not  reply,  or  lie  would 
lu'ooine  angry,  and  no«t  give  an  answer.    Now .  let  a  diviner  per- 


i  AfUtUetH  XVII.  lit. 

- 】7- 人 -"'y,  (  lu-t  ne  I  {I^eyge's  tranj>l.  p.  3' ).')). 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  【）ivi"atio" 


185 


foratt*  a  tortoise  shell  in  sheer  play,  or  sor 言 tlie  milfoil  for  nothing, 
and  tlius  mock  Ht^aven  and  Karth,  he  would  obtain  omens  and 
signs  all  the  same.  Would  Heaven  and  Earth  then  r»*ply  indis- 
iTimiuately?  Or  let  a  man  n'vile  Heaven,  while  divining  by  slirlls, 
or  beat  tlic  Eartli,  while  drawing  the  lots,  wliicli  is  tlie  lieight  of 
impiety,  1"'  would  obtain  omens  aud  signs  nevertheless.  If  omens 
and  signs  are  tin*  spirit  of  llca\ rn  and  Karth,  why  do  tl"、y  not 
extinguisli  the  tire  oi'  tin'  divinor. 1  burn  his  hand,  shake  his  tinkers, 
tlisturh  his  signs,  strike  his  body  with  painful  diseases,  and  cause 
his  blood  to  freeze  and  to  boil,  instead  ol*  still  showing  liiui  omens 
and  sending  signs?  Do  Heaven  and  Earth  not  ioar  the  bother,  and 
not  disdain  to  take  tliis  tnmblo?  L"oking  at  the  j»rol)lem  from  this 
point  of  view  it  becomes  plain  to  us  that  tli,'  diviners  do  not  ask 
Heaven  and  Eartli,  ami  that  ointMis  and  signs  are  not  tli«'  replir^ 
of  the  latter. 

Besides,  those  who  divine  arc  sure  to  be  either  lucky  or  un- 
lucky. Some  arc  ol'  opinion  that  good  and  bad  luck  forrospoiul 
to  tin*  good  and  tlit*  had  artions  of  mankind.  J  hus  bliss  and 
tV'Iicity  would  accompany  goodness,  ami  calamitous  changes  follow 
in  the  rear  of  badness.  Good  or  bad  government  is  tlie  result  of 
goodness  or  biulncss,  but  I  <loubt  that  lira v«'ii  and  Eartli  juirpost'ly 
reply,  when  questioned  by  "ivim'rs.  Wlion  a  lucky  man  (！ tits  up 
a  tortoise,  lie  Hnds  auspicious  oim'iis,  、vli,'r('as  an  unlucky  one, 
grasping  the  milfoil,  ohtains  contrary  signs.  This  will  be  sliou  n  by 
the  following  examples. 

( 'fiou  was  the  worst  of  rulers:  «lurin^  his  n'igti  there  was  an 
abundance  of  ralamitous  wits.  So\  ruty  times  the  tortoise  was 
consulted,  and  the  replies  w  ere  always  unlucky.  Therefore  T.sn  >72 
said,  "  Ext-ellent  mn\  and  the  great  tin-toise  dare  not  know  any- 
thing about  happiness.  The  wdrthy  arc  not  called  to  office,  and 
the  large  tortoiw'  docs  not  give  good  onu'ns.  A  catastrophe  is 
impending." :i 

Whoii  Kiwr  W'u  of  ( 7iau  roceivoil  tlie  l»eavenly  appointnu'iit, 
and  Kfw  Tm  ascend«Ml  the  dragon  tlirom'.  I  leaven  und  men  con- 
jointly 1,'iit  tlioin  tlii'ir  aid,  and  tlicn-  w  vrv  "m'at  numbers  of  wonders 
and  miracles.    The  sons  ol'  /•'/,',/  and  ，'','；、  divine<l  by  shells,  and 

1  Which  he  uses  in  burning  the  tortoise  shell. 

2  The  minister  of  f'hou. 

s  Cf.  Shu-lcmg,  tin  po  k'tm  Li  and  Sfu-chi  cliap.  .'{  (( 'Aa t  anner,  Mnn.  Hittt. 
Vol.  I，  p.  204). 

4  The  countrymen  of  Kuo  Tmi,  who  wa»  born  in  F>'ny,  iti  the  sub- prefecture 
of  P'a  iu  Kiangm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


180 


I.uti  -Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


they  likewise  received  propitious  replies.  Tlio  onions  which  a  lucky 
man  attracts  by  liis  personality  are  invariably  good,  whereas 
1 1  lose  brought  about  by  the  doings  ot'  an  unlucky  jiersiin  arc 
always  bad. 

When  *y"7'  T  ni 1  of  Wei  died.  I"'  I  in  (！  no  ri^litful  lieir,  but 
six  ilU'pHinatf  sons.2  Tljey  di\ inod,  who  would  be  the  successor, 
mul  ma«le  out  that  bathing  and  tlio  wearing  of  goms  would  allbrd 
an  onion.  Five  of  the  sons  took  a  batli,  and  :i(lorn(*<l  thciuseh^'s 
\\  itli  prrcious  stones,  hut  S/tiJi  Ch  i  7:"'3  sai<l,  "  Who,  being  in  mourn- 
ing for  a  parent,  <—';in  l>atl"'  ami  wear  gcina ?"  Hence  lie  did  not 
bat  1 10,  nor  wear  any  gt'ins.  It  \\<is  hr  w  ho  hit  tlie  onit'ii.  Tin'  m»'n 
r>f  W  t  i  divining  confidod  in  (In*  \\  isdom  tlu*  tortoi^r,4  but  it  did 
not  possess  any  wisdom,  the  w  iso  oru*  was  >/<</<  Ch  '•  Tsr  himself. 
He  govonu'd  liis  Stat«*  well,  and  what  lie  s;iid  was  excel  lent,  hence 
tlii'  IVlicitons  augiirics.  Had  no  m'om'sc  been  takon  to  (iiviuatiou 
at  that  tim<\  and  tlio  people  alone  be  consulted,  tlioy  would  never- 
theless ha\ f  (h'clart'd  in  his  favour.  Why'.*  Because  the  heart  and 
its  iV«^ lilies  are  nothing  else  than  luck  and  niislmp.  If  this  be  true, 
it  disposes  of  tlie  (ruth  of  divination.  Wliile  tlu'  shells  are  bcin^; 
rut  in  piet-os,  ami  the  straws  sorted,  omens  and  signs  take  place 
spontaneously,  and  while  tliey  appear,  liappiness  uud  misfortune 
happen  of  their  own  aceonl,  and  tlio  lucky  a»  well  as  the  unlucky 
fall  in  with  them  by  cliance. 

Tlie  lurky  meet  with  good  omens,  whereas  the  unlucky  en- 
counter bad  sig;ns.  Thus  \\  lierever  the  lucky  pass,  things  are 
pleasant  to  them,  and  whorrver  (liey  look,  they  behold  felicitous 
objects.  Yet  tliose  pleasant  tilings  and  felicitous  objects  are  not 
special  aupmes  for  the  lucky.  In  a  similar  manner  the  unlucky 
erimunter  all  sorbi  of  hardships  on  their  way.  These  gootl  and 
bad  things  are  not  the  response  of  Heaven,  it  is  by  cliance  that 
they  fall  to  the  lot  of  tin'  good  and  the  bad.  The  lucky  and  un- 
lucky omens  obtaiiu'd  by  cutting  the  tortoise  and  tl rawing  tlie 
milfoil  are  like  the  hapjiiness  and  tlio  unlia]>piiH>s8  wliirli  we  ex- 
j)erience.    Tliis  much  we  gather  i'roiu  the  following  instances. 

When  Kin«f  W'tt  of  (7tou  was  (lo\vn-spirit»'(l,  the  Duke  of 
Choii  consulted  rliree  tortoises,  and  said  tliat  he  would  meet  with 

1  The  lA-ki  writes  Shih  T"i  (  hung.  , 
- From  lii-s  ooncubines. 

3  A  feudal  lord  in  W  ei,  inentioiu'd  in  tlie  T.so-chunn,  Duke  f  hwing  12th  year 
(6H1  h.c),  as  influencing  the  policy  of  his  native  State. 

4  So  far  the  story  is  culled  t'roni  the  Li  ki,  T  nn  hung  11  (Le<jfff,  Sucrnl  Books 
Vol.  XXVII，  p.  lbl). 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  D!\in:itioii. 


187 


success. 1  When  the  minister  of  L«,  Clmnng  Sfm^  had  got  a  son.  Mn 
Shu,3  he  drew  the  lots  with  the  help  of  tlie  Yi-k'my  and  em-ountercd  the 
36th  diagram,4  wliich  became  tlie  15tli.5  In  regard  to  the  diviuation 
with  shells  the  term  to  meet "  is  used,  and  the  expression  to  encottnter 
is  applied  to  the  drawing  of  straws.  Thus,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  replies  were  obtained  by  mere  chance,  and  were  not  the  out- 
come of  goodness  or  badness. 

The  good  meet  with  happiness,  and  the  wicked  encounter  mis- 
fortune. The  law  of  Heaven  is  spontaneity,  it  does  nothiug  for 
tin*  s;ike  of  man.  The  liappim'ss  attending  the  government  of  a 
ruler  must  b«*  jmlged  by  tin'  same  principle.  When  n  prince  cluiuces 
to  be  virtuous,  it  just  so  hafipons  that  there  is  peace  and  joy,  and 
that  many  wonderful  and  aus|>icious  things  ajij>ear.  Contrariwise, 
when  tliere  happons  to  be  n  degenerate  ruler,  all  this  is  reversctl. 

There  are  many  jicople  discoursing  on  divination,  but  very 
few  who  understand  its  real  meaning.  Some  hold  that  divination 
must  not  be  practised  by  itself,  but  that  circumstances  are  to  be 
taken  into  account.  The  tortoise  being  cut.  and  tlie  milfoil  grasped, 
omenn  and  signs  appear.  Seeing  unusual  signs,  the  diviners  resort 
to  their  imagination:  auspicious  omens  they  explain  as  dis.istrous. 
and  unlucky  si^ns  as  auspicious.  If  in  such  a  case  luck  and  mis- 
hap do  not  become  manifest,  people  say  that  divination  is  not  to 
be  trusted. 

When  King  U'u  of  dest roved  (  lion,"  tlie  interpreters  put 

a  bad  construction  u|)on  \\w.  oiihmis,  and  spoke  <»fa  great  calamity. 
T'ai  Kuiuj  Hung  the  stalks  away,  and  trampled  upon  the  tortoise 
snying,  "  How  can  dried  bones  and  (load  herbs  know  fate?" 

In  case  tlie  omens  and  signs  obtained  by  diviuation  do  not 
correspond  to  hapjnness  and  misfortune,  tliere  must  have  been  a 


1  The  Duke  of*  C/iou  had  built  three  alurs  to  liis  three  ancestors,  whom  he 
consulted  on  the  fate  of  h'm  sick  brother  、V"  Wanp.  lie  probably  had  one  tortoise 
for  each  altar.    (Cf.  Shi-chi  chap.  :{:;,  j>.  lv.  and  p.  205.) 

- Sku  'Sun  Chaang  Shu  or  Shu  Sun  T>' '  hn>.  When  t.c  died  in  (； (»3  B.r.,  lie 
received  the  posthumous  name  ( 'huang. 

J  The  same  as  Shu  Sim  Mu  7V  nientioued  in  Chap.  XVII.  His  clan  name 
was  f>hu  Sun,  Mu  being  his  posthumoub  title. 

4  The  diagram  Mhuj-i. 

1  The  diagram  CUien.    Want/  (  hung  here  (i notes  a  passage  from  the 
c/tuan,  Duke  f  'h'ao  5th  year  (I-egye  Vol.  V,  Pt.  II，  [>.  G04)   where  the  expression 
'*  encountered  "         is  used. 


Tlie  lust  emperor  oi'  tlie  -、 7"i"y  dynasty,  (  Una  糸、 }辛 -. 


Digitized  by  Google 


188 


I.llii-  Ilrng:    B.  IMrtaplivsiral. 


mistake.  When  the  soothsayers  arc  unable  to  ascertain  late,  it  in 
thrown  into  confusion,  and  owing  to  this  confusion  T'ai  Kwuj  dis- 
paraged divination. 

Divination  by  shells  and  stalks  boars  a  resemblance  to  the 
administration  of  a  wise  t'iriperor,  and  the  omens  of  divination  are 
likt"  the  auspicious  portents  during  the  r«»i^n  of  such  an  emperor. 
These  portents  aro  unusual,  and  the  omens  are  rxtraonlinary  and 
marvellous.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  diviners  fall  into  error, 
and  it  is  the  unusual  which  blindfolds  the  emperor's  advisers  to 
such  a  <l»'^r«'t\  that  in  their  blirulness  tliev  ilerlarc  a  peaceful  govern- 
ment to  be  mismana^od,  and  in  tlicir  rrror  call  had  wliat  is  auspi- 
cious. Lucky  oinrns  a  lucky  man  can  fall  in  with,  an<l.  、、l"'n 
during  a  n'ign  auspicious  portents  are  met  u  ith,  it  is  a  manifestation 
of  tlie  virtue  of  a  wise  ruler.  When  the  King  of  CI,""  destroyed 
Cko't,  lu»  eiicouiiteivd  the  omens  of  a  bird  and  a  iish,  why  did  his 
diviners  regard  these  as  unlucky  omens Had  King  Wu  s  elevation 
not  been  prcdostinateil.  lie  ouglit  not  to  have  met  with  portents, 
when  going  out.  Provided  that  it  was  Wu  Want/\s  fate  to  rise,  tlie 
diviners  sliouM  not  have  thought  it  inauspi«-ious.  Thus,  since  the 
divination  for  King  Wu  could  not  be  unlucky,  but  was  declared  to 
be  so,  this  inteq)retation  was  «irroneou8. 

When  Im  was  ^o'wii  to  attack  Yiieh,  the  diviners  by  milfoil 
gave  thrir  verdict  to  the  ,'HVrt  tliat  tlie  tripod  liad  broken  its  leg. 
T.st-  KtUKj  explained  this  as  evil.  Why?  Bo»  n uso  the  tripod  had  its 
leg  broken,  and  for  moving  on  one  uses  the  legs.  Consequently 
he  considered  it  unlucky.  Confwim,  on  the  (»tlier  hand,  explained 
it  a»  lucky,  saying,  "The  people  of  Yiie/i  arc  living  on  the  water; 
to  reacli  them  one  requires  boats,  not  ！ ej^s."  Tlu'rcf'ore  he  called 
it  lucky.    Lu  invaded  YfU>fi,  and  in  fact  defeated  it. 

Ttie  Kung  explained  the  breaking  of  the  leg  of  the  tripod  as 
evil,  just  as  the  interpretation  of  the  divinei-s  of  CIiou  was  adverse. 
But  in  spite  oi'  this  adverse  c《mm"'nt  there  was  certainly  luck,  and 
in  accordance  with  the  right  explanation  of  the  broken  leg  Yueh 
could  be  invaded,  hi  Chou  there  were  many  porsons  、vho  could 
give  a  straight i'orward  interpretation  likr  7:"'  hung,  but  very  few 
gifted  witli  tlie  same  subtU-  reasoning  power  as  Confucius.  Conse- 
quently, upon  viewing  an  unusual  omen,  tlicy  were  unable  to  catch 
the  meaning. 

Bec;ius«'  Wu  Wang  had  no  fault,  when  tlie  divining  took 
place,  and  nevertheless  got  a  bad  omen,  people  think  that  ilivi- 
nation  must  not  bv  practisrd  by  itself,  and  is  hut  of  little  service 
in  governuieut.    But  it   serves  to  show  that  there  are  spiritual 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Divination. 


180 


powei-s,  and  that  a  plan  is  not  nu'roly  tl"'  production  of  some- 
body's brain.1 

Writers  and  chroniclers  have  collcctod  all  soils  of"  evi'iits,  as 
/ Ian  Fti  7:"'  for  instaiHH*,  wlio  in  Ins  chapter  on  tlie  eiiibellishincnt 
of"  false  doctrines2  oxaminos  tin*  proois  oi'  those  maniiestations. 
Thrre  he  depreciates  'livitiation  I>v  slirlls,  stigmatises  tliat  by  weeds, 
and  cuinU'inns  tlio  common  l"'l"'f  in  tl"'ir  tis^fulness.  As  a  matter 
of  i'act,  divination  can  I)o  made  viso  of.  yet  it  happens  that  the 
diviiu'rs  an*  mistaken  in  tlieir  intrrprrtations.  hi  tlie  (chapter  IIuikj- 
f<in  wc  rt*ad  concertiing  the  iuvrstigation  (»f  <loul)ts  that,  as  regards 
exi-cptional  portents  (*x plained  by  divination,  the  son  lieaven  must 
be  a>skcd,  hut  tliat  somotimcs  the  niiiiisti'is  and  ol'licials  arc  also 
able  to  ollVr  a  st)Ititiou.3  Owing  to  this  inability  to  give  a  correct 
ex|>lariati()n,  onn-ns  and  ai^ns  often  do  not.  prove  true,  lie  net*  the 
distrust  in  tho  usefulness  of  divination. 

Duke  Wen  of  Chin  was  at  war  with  the  viscount  oi'  Ch  a.  He 
dreamt  tliat  lie  was  wrestling  with  lvinij  I'll  auj*  who  gained  tlie 
upper  haud,  and  siu-ked  his  brains.  This  was  interpreted  as  in- 
auspicious, but  (；/////  Fou  5  ； said.  44  It  is  lucky.  Your  Ilighness  could 
look  up  to  Ifravt-n.  wliile  Ch  n  was  hondini;  down  umlcr  the  weight 
of  his  guilt.  .Sucking  yuur  brains  mt'aiw  softening  and  craving  for 
rneri'V.""  The  battlf  was  fouglit.  and  Chin  was  in  laet  victorious, 
as  Chin  Fnn  had  prognosticated. 

The  interpretation  ol'  dreams  is  like  tl"*  explanation  of  tlie 
signs  of  tlit'  tortoise.  l  lu«  oiuMrocrilios  of  Chin  <li«l  not  see  the 
purport  of  tin-  visions,  as  the  diviners  of  Chou  did  not  understand 
the  nature  the  omens  of  the  tortoisr-sliell.  Visions  arc  pcrft'ctly 
true,  and  omens  pertVctly  rorrcct,  but  human  knowledge  is  \m- 
suffirifnt,  and  tlir  reasoning  tliciei'ore  not  to  tlu*  point. 

There  is  still  another  roporr,  art'onliiig  to  w  hich  1「"，  Avlien 
attacking  C/toa.  roiisultod  the  tortoise,  but  the  tortoise  was  de- 
formed.7   The  diviners  re^ardotl  this  as  very  ui 屮 ropitious,  but  T'ni 


1  Those  in  power  win  tlie  people  over  to  their  views  by  showing  that  tlie 
omens  arc  favourable,  and  tliat  the  spirits  causing  them  give  their  approval. 
J  Chapter  XIX  of  Han  Fei  Tue's  work. 

•  Cf.  Shu-king,  //«ny-/an,  Pt  V,  Bk.  IV，  20  {Legge  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II,  p.  334). 

*  The  viscount  of  (  h  it,  who  styled  Iiiinsch"  king. 
s  The  Tm>-chuan  calls  tiim  Tse  Fan. 

r'  Quotation  from  tlie  Tm-cliuan,  Duke  HM  2>>th  year  (('»：{  1  «.c). 

了  1  sumiise  from  ilie  context  that  the  character  must   denote  some 

deformity  of  tlie  tortoise.  Kamt-lu  »ays  in  the  appendix  tliat  tlie  meaning  is 
uukuowu. 


Digitized  by  Google 


190 


Lnu-H«ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


Kung  said,  "  Tlie  deformation  of  tin1  tortoisr  means  bad  luck  for 
sacrifices,  but  victory  in  war."  Kin";  Wu  followed  his  advice,  atul 
at  length  destroyed  Chou.  If  this  be  really  so,  this  story  is  like 
tlie  uttorancos  of  Coiif"':h'、、  on  the  diagrams,  and  Clan  Fun  s  inter- 
pretation ol'  the  dreain.  Onu'iis  anil  signs  are  trur  l>v  any  u"'a【is. 
if  good  and  bad  fortunes  do  not  huppen  us  prodii'tctl,  it  is  tin' 
fault  of  the  diviiu*is  who  do  not  iiiulerstand  their  busiiioss. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Death. 


101 


CHAPTER  XV. 
On  Death  (Lun-sse). 

People  say  that  the  dead  become  ghosts,  are  conscious,  and 
can  hurt  mrn.  Let  us  cxainim»  this  by  comparing  men  with  other 
beinj^: ― 

The  dead  do  not  become  gliosts,  hn\v  no  consciousness,  and 
ran  not  injure  others.  How  do  we  kuo、v  this?  We  know  it  from 
other  beings.  Man  is  a  being,  and  otlier  creatures  are  likewise 
beings.  When  a  creature  dies,  it  does  not  become  a  ghost,  for 
what,  reason  then  must  man  alone  become  a  ghost,  when  he  ex- 
pires? In  this  world  you  can  ！ separate  man  from  other  creatures, 
but  not  on  the  ground  that  he  becomes  a  ghost.  The  faculty  to 
become  a  ghost  cannot  bv  a  distiix  tive  mark.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  no  dillVronce  hotwccii  man  and  other  creatures,  we 
have  no  reason  either  to  suppose  that  man  may  bfcome  a  ghost. 

Man  lives  by  tlic  vital  fluid.  VVIkmi  \w  dies,  this  vital  fluid 
is  exhausted.  It  resides  in  the  arteries.  At  death  tl"、  pulse  stops, 
and  the  vital  fluid  ceases  to  work :  then  the  body  decays,  and 
turns  into  earth  and  clay-    By  wliat  could  it  become  a  ghost? 

Without  ears  or  oy«'s  men  have  no  perceptions.  In  this 
respect  the  deaf  and  the  blind  resemble  plants  and  trees.  I3ut  are 
men,  whose  vital  fluid  is  fjone,  merely  as  if  they  had  no  eyes,  or 
no  ears?   No.  their  decay  means  complete  dissolution. 

That  wliiirh  is  diirusc  and  invisible,  is  railed  a  ghost,  or  a 
spirit.  Wlien  pt'ople.  pensive  the  shape  of  a  gliost  or  a  spirit,  it 
cannot  be  the  vital  fluid  of  a  dead  man,  because  ^host  and  spirit 
are  only  designations  for  something  (lilTuse  and  invisible.  When  a 
man  dies,  his  spirit  as<*ends  to  lieavon.  and  his  l)ones  return  to 
the  earth,  therefore  lliey  are  called  Kuei  (ghost) 1  whicli  means  "to 
return."2    A  spirit  (S/uhi)  is  something  difluse  and  shapeless. 

Some  say  that  ghost  and  spirit  are  names  of  activity  and 
passivity.  The  passive  principle  oj)|K»scs  things  and  return t*,  lience 
its  name  AW  (glii)st).    Tlif  active  principle  fosters  and  produces 

'鬼  ， 


Digitized  by  Google 


192 


I.un-II.'ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


tilings,  and  tlu'refori-  is  callod  SI"''"  (spirit),'  which  means  "  to  ex- 
teiul." 2  This  is  re-iterated  without  end.  Wlien  it  fuiislies,  it  be- 
gins again. 

Man  lives  by  the  spiritual  fluid.  When  he  dies,  he  again 
returns  this  spiritual  (luid.  Activity  and  passivity  are  spoken  of 
jus  s[»irit  and  ghost.  Wlien  man  dies,  one  speaks  likewise  of  bis 
spirit  and  his  ghost. 

The  fluid  hfcotnes  man,  just  as  water  turns  into  ice.  The 
water  crystallises  ice,  and  ( lie  fluid  coagulates,  ami  forms  man. 
The  ice  melting  b»*cc)ines  water,  and  man  dying  becomes  spirit 
again.  It  is  railed  spirit,  just  as  inolton  ice  resumes  the  name 
water.  Wlien  wo  have  a  man  before  us,  \\e  use  another  name. 
Hence  there  are  no  proofs  for  the  assertion  that  tlie  dead  possess 
knowledge,  or  that  they  can  take  a  form,  and  injure  people. 

When  mm  see  ghosts,  thoy  appear  like  living  men.  Just 
from  the  fact  tliat  thoy  have  the  sliape  of  living  men  we  can  infer 
that  they  cannot  I"'  the  essence  of  tin*  dead,  as  will  be  seen  iVoni 
the  following: ― 

Fill  a  bag  with  rico,  and  a  sack  with  millet.  The  rice  in 
the  bag  is  like  the  millet  in  flic  sack.  Full,  tliey  look  strong, 
stand  upright,  and  can  be  seen.  Looking  at  them  from  afar,  people 
know  tliat  tlu-y  arc  a  bag  of  rice,  and  a  sack  of  millet,  because 
their  forms  com'spontl  to  their  contents,  and  thus  become  per- 
coptibltv  If  the  bag  lias  a  hole,  the  rice  runs  out,  and  if  the  sack 
is  damaged,  the  millet  is  spilt.  Tlien  the  bag  and  the  sack  col- 
lapse, and  are  no  more  visible,  when  looked  at  IVom  afar. 

Man's  vital  fluid  resides  in  the  body,  as  the  millet  unci  the 
rice  do  in  tlie  hag  antl  tli«»  sark.  At  «leath  the  body  decays,  anil 
the  vital  fluid  disperses,  just  :w  tlie  millet  and  the  rwv  escape  from 
tlie  piem'd  or  (laina«?c<l  bag,  or  sack.  When  tlif  millet  or  the  rice 
are  gone,  tht*  hag  aiul  the  sack  do  not  take  a  form  again.  How 
then  could  there  be  a  visible  body  again,  after  the  vital  fluid  has 
beeu  scattered  and  lost? 

When  animals  die,  llioir  <l<*sh  decomposes,  but  tlieir  skin  and 
their  hair  still  remain,  and  ran  be  worked  into  a  fur,  which  ap- 
pears still  to  liave  the  sliapo  of  an  animal.  Tlnrofore  dog  thieves 
will  don  dog  skins.  IVople  then  do  not  discrovcr  tliem.  because 
disguised  in  a  dog's  fur-skin,  they  do  not  rouse  any  suspicion. 

Now,  when  a  man  dii's,  his  skin  and  liair  are  destroyed. 
Provided  that  his  vital  force  did  still  exist,  how  could  the  spirit 

, 神  2  # 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Death. 


again  enter  the  same  body,  and  become  visible?  Tlie  dead  cannot 
borrow  the  body  of  a  living  man  to  re-appear,  ncitlier  can  tlie 
living  borrow  tho  soul  of  tlie  dead  to  disappear. 

The  Six  Animals 1  can  only  be  transformed  into  a  human 
sliape  as  long  as  tlieir  bodies  and  their  vital  fluid  arc  still  un- 
im paired.  Wlien  tliry  die,  tlieir  bodies  jmt.rH'y,  and  even,  if  they 
I >ossess  the  courage  and  the  audacity  of  a  tiger  or  a  rhinoceros, 
tliey  can  no  more  be  mi'tainorpliosrd.  Niu  Ait  duke  of  hit1  during 
an  illness  could  br  transformed  into  a  tiger,  because  he  was  not 
y»'t  dead.  It  happens  that  a  living  body  is  transforinetl  into 
another  living  body,  but  not  that  a  dead  body  is  elian^ed  into  a 
living  one. 


From  the  time,  wlien  heaven  and  earth  were  set  in  order, 
and  the  reign  of  the  "  Human  Kmpcrors  "a  clou  nward  people  died 
at  tlieir  allotted  time.  Of  those,  win)  expired  in  their  middle  age, 
or  quite  young,  millions  and  millions  might  be  rouuted.  I'he 
number  of  the  persons  actually  living  would  be  less  than  that  of 
those  who  (l"'tl.  If  we  suppose  tlutt  after  deatli  a  man  becomesi 
a  ghost,  there  would  be  a  ghost  on  every  road,  and  at  every 
step.  Should  men  appear  as  jrhosts  after  death,  then  tens  of 
thousands  of  ghosts  ou^lit  to  be  seen.  Tliey  would  fill  the  lialls, 
throng  the  courts,  and  blrx-k  the  streets  and  alleys,  instead  of  tlie 
one  or  two  which  are  occasionally  met  with. 

Wlien  a  man  has  died  on  a  battle- tield,  tliey  say  that  his 
blood  becomes  a  \vilI-o*-the-\vis[).  Tlu*  blood  is  the  vital  force  of 
the  living.  Tlie  will-o'-tho-wisp  set*n  by  people,  while  walking  at 
night,  lias  no  human  form,  it  is  desultory  and  coucontrated  like 
a  light.  Though  being  tlu1  blood  of  a  dead  man,  it  docs  not  re- 
semble a  human  sliape  in  form,  how  then  could  a  man,  whose 
vital  force  is  gone,  still  appear  \\  ith  a  human  body? 

If  the  ghosts  seen  all  looked  like  dead  men,  there  might  be 
some  doubt  left  that  the  dead  become  gliosts.  and  sometimes  even 
assume  liuman  form. 


1  The  Six  Donu-stir  Animals  are:  -  the  tlie  ox,  tlie  guat,  tl"'  pig,  the 

dog,  and  the  fowl. 

«  Cf.  Chap.  XXVII. 

1  A  series  ol"  inytiiit-a!  rulers  ("'  n-niolest  anti<|uit} . 


Digitized  by  Google 


194 


Luii-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


Sick  people  see  ghosts,  and  say  that  So-and-So  lias  come  to 
them.  At  tliat  time  So-and-So  wns  not  yet  dead,  but  the  llnid 
perceived  resembled  him.  If  t\\o  dead  become  ghosts,  how  is  it 
that  sick  people  see  the  bodies  of  the  living? 


The  nature  of  heaven  and  earth  is  sucli,  that  a  new  fire  cau 
be  lighted,  but  an  extinguished  fire  cannot  be  set  al)laze  again.  A 
new  man  can  be  born,  but  a  dead  one  cannot  be  resurrectetl.  If 
burnt-out  aslit's  could  be  kindled  again  into  a  blazinu;  fire,  l  、、- oul(l 
be  very  mucli  ol.  o|»inioii  tliat  the  <lead  might  take  a  bodily  form 
again.  .Sin<v.  however,  aw  extinguished  fire  cannot  burn  again,  we 
are  UhI  to  d"'  conclusion  that  the  dead  cannot  be'，om(»  ghosts. 

Ghosts  are  coiisi»lero(l  U)  he  the  vital  spirits  of  the  dead.  If 
this  wevo  really  (he  case,  peo[)le  seeing  ghosts  ought  to  see  tlieir 
bodirs  naked  only,  but  not  wearing  dresses,  or  covered  with  gar- 
ments, because  garm'-nts  have  no  vital  spirits.  Wlien  men  die, 
their  clotlit-s  become 山 'romposwl  together  with  their  bodies,  h('、v 
could  they  be  pu(  on  again? 

The  vital  spirits  have  their  original  seat  in  the  blood  fluid, 
and  this  fluid  alw  ays  adheres  t«,  tlio  body.  If  notwitlistanding  tho 
(lfM'ay  <>1'  tlie  body  tlie  vital  spirits  were  still  extant,  they  might 
1)p<'oiiip  ghosts.  Now  garments  are  made  of  silk  stud's  <iik1  other 
falirics.  During  man's  life-time  liis  blood  tluid  (Iocs  not  periiK'ak' 
tliem.  nor  have  they  any  blood  of  their  own.  WIhmi  the  body  is 
destroyed,  tlicy  sliare  its  fate,  how  could  tliey  of  tliomselves  re- 
assunn'  the  sliape  of  garments.  Consecjuently,  if  ^liosts  are  seen 
whii'li  bear  a  resemblance  to  dresses,  thev  must  also  be  like  bodies, 
ami  if  tliey  are,  we  know  that  they  cannot  be  the  vital  spirits  of 
the  dead. 

Since  the  <l,<4a(l  raimot  beconie  ghosts,  they  cannot  have  auy 
cf)nstMousncss  cither.  We  infer  this  from  the  (iwt  that  before  tlieir 
birtli  men  lwive  no  consciousness.  HflV)re  they  are  horn,  tliey  form 
part  ol'  the  priino^enial  fluid,  and  wIkmi  thoy  die,  tliey  revert  to 
it.  Tlii-s  primo^enial  fhii<l  is  vague  and  difTiise,  ami  the  liurnau 
fluid,  a  part  of  it.  Anterior  to  his  birtli,  man  is  devoid  of  con- 
sciousness, and  at  liis  deatli  lie  returns  to  this  original  state  of 
U!icons(?iousness,  ibr  liow  should  he  be  conscious? 

Man  is  intelligent  aud  sagacious,  because  he  has  in  himself 
the  fluid  of  the  Five  Virtues,  which  is  in  liiui,  because  the  Five 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Death. 


195 


Organs  1  are  in  liis  body.  As  long  as  the  Ave  parts  are  uninjured, 
man  is  bri^lit  and  dt*ver，  but,  >vhen  they  become  diseased,  his 
intelle«'t  is  (linune<l  and  contused,  which  is  tantamount  to  stupidity 
and  dullness. 

Alter  death  the  five  inward  parts  putrefy,  and.  when  they  do 
so,  tlif  five  virtues  lose  their  substratum.  Tliat  wliich  harbours 
intt'lligorn'e  is  destroy*'*!,  and  that  whirli  is  called  intelligence  dis- 
appears. The  body  mpiircs  the  rtui'l  for  its  itiaintonanc**,  and  the 
fluid,  the  body  to  become  conscious.  There  is  no  fire  in  the  world 
burning  quite  at'  itsdf,  how  could  there  b<*  an  essence  without  a 
body,  but  conscious  of  itself? 

Man  s  deatli  is  like  sleep,  and  slt'cp  conn's  next  to  a  tratuu',2 
\\  resembles  <leath.    If  a  man  does  not  wake  up  again  from 

a  trance,  lie  If  he  awakes,  he  rolurns  lVcmi  death,  us  tliou^h 

li，  had  been  asleep.  Thus  sleep,  a  t.mm'c,  and  deatli  ari>  essen- 
tially tlif  saint*.  A  sloeper  cannot  know  what  lie  «lid,  when  lie 
was  awake,  as  a  dead  man  is  unawaie  of  his  iloings  during  his 
lile-time.  People  may  talk  or  do  anything  by  tlic  side  of  a  sleep- 
ing man,  lie  tlocs  not  know,  and  so  the  dead  man  has  no  con- 
st  ioiisiu'ss  ("•  tlie  »()<)(1  or  bad  actions  j»eriV)nne<l  in  iVotit  of  his 
cotVm.  Whrn  a  man  is  asleep,  his  vital  fluid  is  still  tliore,  and  his 
body  intact,  and  yet  lie  is  unconscious.  How  mucl)  more  muat 
this  be  the  vase  with  a  dead  man.  whose  vital  spirit  is  scatterctl 
and  gone,  ami  whose  body  is  in  a  state  of  decay  .' 

Wlien  a  man  has  bvvn  beaten  and  hurt  by  another,  he  g«e» 
to  the  mao;istrat«*,  and  makes  bin  complaint,  because  he  can  talk 
t«>  people,  and  is  conscious.  Hut.  when  a  poreon  is  slain  by  some- 
body, the  iminlcrer  is  unknown,  liis  tainily  perhaps  not  knowing 
<'vcn  the  place,  where  his  corpse  is  lying.  It"  under  sucli  circum- 
statu:es  the  niunlered  man  was  conscious,  he  would  assuredly  be 
tilled  with  the  greatest  wrath  against  liis  munlerer.  lie  ought  to 
be  able  to  speak  into  the  magistrate's  car,  and  give  him  the  name 
of  tlie  miscreant,  and,  if  he  were  able  to  go  liome,  and  speak  to 
his  people,  he  would  inform  them,  where  the  body  was.  But  all 
that  he  cannot  do.    That  shows  that  he  has  no  ronsciousiu'ss. 

1  The  Five  Virtues  arc :  —Benevolence,  Justice,  Propriety,  Knowledge,  and 
Truth ;  the  Five  Organs:— the  Heart,  tlie  Liver,  tlie  Stomach,  the  Lungs,  and  the 
Kidneys. 

1  No  dictionary  gives  this  mcnuing  lor  Vifii  which  usually  moans  "  to 

cxtennitiate,  to  cut  off,  to  cease."   But  it  ounnot  be  anytliing  el.s<-  liere.   The  Cliinese 
of  to-day  will  likewise  call  a  faint  "  death,"'  or  -  small  deatli,''  lutiao-s^f 小死. 

,  I,' 

Digitized  by  Google 


10(> 


Lun -Hong:  R.  Mefapliysical. 


No\v-a-(lays,  living  persons  in  a  trance  will  sometimes  as  mediums 
speak  i'or  thoae  w  ho  liavc  «licd,  ami  diviners,  striking  black  chords, 
will  call  down  the  dead,  whose  souls  tlicn  will  talk  througli  the  divi- 
iut's  mouth.  All  tliut  is  brag  and  wild  talk.  It'  it  be  not  nierr 
gossip,  then  w  e  liave  a  manifchtati<in  oi'  tlie  vital  fluid  of  some  being. 

,  Soini'  say  tliat  the  spirit  cannot  sj>rak.  If  it  cannot  speak, 
it  cannot  have  any  knowledge  citlicr.  Ktio、vl"(lgt'  nnjuircs  a  lorrf, 
just  as  speech  does. 

Anterior  to  "iau,s  death,  his  mental  faculties  and  vital  spirit 
are  all  in  order.  When  lie  falls  sick,  lie  becomes  t;i«l(l y,  ami  Ins 
vital  spirit  is  afl'crlod.  Dcatli  is  t lie  climax  of  sickness.  If  even 
during;  a  sickness,  wliicli  is  only  a  small  l)e*;ii»iiing  of  death,  a 
man  feels  ••onfiiseil  and  ^iddy,  how  will  it  be,  when  tlie  <*liniax 
is  reached?  When  tln>  vital  spirit  is  seriously  alliM'ted,  it  \oaea  its 
(MMist'iousjU'ss,  and  when  it  is  {iltogetlii'r? 

Human  death  is  like  the  extinction  of  iirc.  Wlit'ii  a  I'm'  is 
extin}>uisli(Hl,  its  light  ilocs  not  shine  any  more,  and  wlien  man 
dies,  his  intrllect  does  not  pen-cive  ； my  move.  The  nature  of  both 
is  the  same.  If  people  n<*\  erthelt-ss  pretend  tliat  the  dead  liave 
know  ledge,  tliey  arc  mistaki'ii.  Wliat  is  the  (liHVrt'i'<'p  between  a 
sick  man  about  (<>  die  and  a  light  about  to  g(、  out;1  When  a  light 
is  extinguished,  its  radiation  is  tl—'rscnl.  and  only  the  camlle 
remains.  When  man  has  died,  liis  vital  force  is  gone,  m"l  the 
body  alone  reinaiiis.  To  assert  tliat  a  person  after  deatli  is  still 
(•(»nsci(»us  is  lik,、  saving  tliat  an  ext"iguisl"'(l  li»lit  sliinos  again. 

During  the  rliilly  winter  inontlis  tin*  mid  air  prevails,  and 
water  turns  into  ice.  At  the  approach  of  spriny;,  the  air  bocomps 
warm,  mid  tlie  i,'e  melts  to  water.  Man  is  born  in  tlio  universe, 
as  ice  is  produced,  so  to  say.  The  Yang  and  the  >7«  Huitls  <，ry- 
stallise,  and  produce  man.  W  hrn  his  years  an,  completed,  and 
liis  span  oi*  life  conn's  to  its  end,  he  dies,  an<l  reverts  to  those 
(luids.  As  spring  water  cannot  frcc/.c  again,  so  tlie  soul  of  a  dead 
man  cannot  bt'(M>ine  a  body  again. 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  jealous  husband  and  a  jealous  wile  are 
living  togethor.  Tlu*  <l«'bauchpry  and  tlu>  disreputable  coiuluct  of  one 
party  is  tlie  cause  of  constant  outbursts  of  anger,  fi^liting,  ami  quar- 
relling. Now.  if  the  husband  dios,  tlie  wife  will  marry  again,  and  it' 
the  u  i i\*  dies,  the  liusbaml  will  do  the  sairn*.  If  the.  other  knew  of  it, 
he  would  undoubtt'dlv  11 V  into  a  rag''.  Hut  husband  and  Avife.  wlien 
desul,  kerj)  jx^rlVi'tly  quiet,  aud  give  no  sound.  Tlie  other  may 
marry  again,  tiny  take  no  heed,  and  it  has  no  evil  consequ*Mn:es. 
Tliat  provrs  that  tliey  hiv  unconscious. 


igitized  by  Google 


On  Dcatli. 


197 


(Jonfuctwi  buried  liis  mother  at  Fang. 1  Subsequently  such 
lieavy  rain  fell,  that  the  tomb  at  Fang  rollapsed.  When  Confucius 
heard  of  it,  he  wept  bitterly  aud  said:— "  丁 lie  aiunents  did  not 
repair  graves."2  TlitTpforo  1"'  did  not  repjur  it.  Providt'd  tlic 
<loa«l  are  consoious.  they  ought  to  be  angry  \vith  tliw  who  do 
not  keep  tlu'ir  tombs  in  repair.  Knowing  this.  ('""/，":""  would 
have  repaired  the  grave  to  plea.so  the  departed  soul,  but  lie  did 
not  tlo  so.  His  intclli^i'iicc  as  a  Sage  was  oi'  the  highest  order, 
but  he  knew  that  spirits  are  unconscious. 

When  dried  bones  art*  lying  about  in  lonely  places,  it  may 
happen  that  some  mournful  cries  are  lieard  there.  If  such  a  wail 
is  heard  at  niglit-tiriie,  |)eoj)le  believe  tliat  it  is  the  voice  of  a  dead 
man.  but  they  are  wrong.  Wlien  a  living  muu  talks,  lie  breathes. 
His  breath  is  kept  in  liis  moutli  and  liis  throat.  He  moves  liis 
tongue,  opens  and  shuts  his  mouth,  and  thus  pnx lures  words.  It 
is  like  playing  a  flu  to.  VVTlien  the  flute  is  brokon,  tlie  air  escapes, 
and  docs  not  ki'q'  insi<lc,  and  t\w  hands  liave  nothing  to  touch. 
Coiise<juently  no  sound  is  produced.  T1h»  tubes  of  the  flute  cor- 
respond to  the  human  moutli  and  throat.  The  hands  tou<，li  the 
lioles  in  tlie  tubes  in  the  same  maimer,  as  man  moves  his  tongue. 
When  he  is  dead,  his  "imitli  ；"" I  throat  decay,  and  the  tongue 
moves  no  more.  How  should  words  be  articulated  tlien?  If,  while 
(\t'uh\  bones  are  lying  about,  w  ails  and  laments  are  lieard,  they 
I'ome  from  men,  ior  bones  »  aimot  produce  them. 

Others  imagine  tliat  it  is  tli*«  autumn  (which  produces  thi'se 
sounds).  This  statement  is  not  much  ilillVrcnt  Iroin  the  other  that 
ghosts  cry  at  night.  If  the  autumn  air  causes  these  extraordinary 
moans  and  wails,  it  must  have  some  substratum.  Because  this  lias 
happened  near  the  bones  of  a  dead  man,  people  liave  presumed 
that  these  bones  are  still  enwious,  and  uttor  tlic^e  in  on  nil  ul  cries 
in  the  wilderness.  There  are  thousands  and  thousands  of  skeletons 
blfurhin^  in  tlie  grass  and  in  the  swamps,  tlierclbre  we  ougl"  to 
be  haunted  by  their  lainents  at  every  step. 

It  is  possible  to  inakt*  somebody  speak,  who  usually  does  not 
speak,  but  impossible  that  sonu'body  who  spoaks,  should  b''  in- 
duced to  speak  again  at*t«T  dcatli.  Kven  lu*  wlio  spoke  before, 
cannot  be  caused  to  speak  again.    Similarly,  wheu  a  plant  comes 

1  A  place  iii  Im  (Sharttun:/). 

a  A  quotation  abridged  from  tlie  Li-ki,  Tan  Rung.  Cf.  Legge,  Li- 1"  Vol.  I, 
p.  123.  Modem  commentators  explain  the  passage  quite  differently.  The  dictum  of 
Con/iinw  would  mean  that  tlie  ancients  did  not  repair  tombs,  because  they  huilt  them 
so  well,  that  they  could  not  collapse.    Warn/  (  huny'x  imerpretation  is  more  natural. 


Digitized  by  Google 


1 DS 


Luii-Hrng:  H.  .Meta|)hvsic.il. 


forth,  its  fluid  is  green,  wliicli  is,  as  it  were,  pven  it.  When  the 
name  plant  dies,  the  green  colour  disappears,  or  is  taken  away. 
I':n(lo、vivl  with  tli,»  fluid,  the  plant  is  given,  (lo|)rived  of  it.  it  loses 
the  fxrern  colour.  After  tin*  latter  is  g()n(、，  it  <、:""""  bv  added  again, 
n<>r  can  the  plant  gr'»、v  ^rcen  again  of  its  own  accord.  Sound 
anil  rolour  correspond  to  on<»  anotltcr,  a nd  art'  both  tleriv«*(l  from 
Ileavou.  TIh、  brilli:""  gm'n  colour  is  Iik«'  a  lugubrious  orv.  The 
colour  c»f  a  faded  plant  cannot  l)oconie  grern  again,  it  would,  t ln'ri'- 
lore,  bv  a  mistake  to  assunic  that  a  dead  man's  cry  could  still  be 
pro 山 u'ed  of  itself". 

M:m  is  able  to  talk,  because  li<'  [xissesscs  vital  energy.  As 
l«)tio  as  he  i-aii  cat  aud  drink,  tlie  vita!  energy  is  well  fed.  but  no 
sooner  <lo  eatinfj;  and  drinking  reuse,  than  the  energy  is  destroyed. 
After  this  destrurtion  then4  are  no  moro  sounds  possiblf.  When 
the  person  is  worn  out,  aud  cannot  eat  any  more,  the  mouth  cannot 
speak  any  lurrlior.  Death  is  exhaustion  in  tlio  higlu'st  degre*'.  lu>\\ 
rould  man  still  speak  then? 

TIhmv  are  tlioso  wlio  say  that  the  dead  smell  the  sacrifireil 
meat,  ami  oat  the  air,  and  that  they  are  tlms  enabled  to  speak. 
Tli,'  viral  forcr  of  the  dead  is  that  the  living.  F.el  a  living 
being  neitlu*r  cat  nor  drink,  and  only  inhale  the  smAl  of  oflorings. 
anil  feed  upon  air,  and  lie  will  die  of  starvation  after  no  more 
tliai)  throe  days. 

Another  opinion  is  tliat  tin'  vital  force  of  the  dead  is  more 
powerful  tlian  tliat  of  the  living,  au<l  tliat  for  this  reason  it  (ran 
sine] I  (lie  air.  and  produoe  s"ui"ls. 

Tin*  vital  force  of  tl"'  living  is  in  their  body,  that  of  the 
dead,  out  of  it.  In  wliat  do  the  tlead  and  the  livinjj  (liHVr,  ami 
w  liat  <lifr<;ri'iiee  docs  it  make  that  the  vital  fluid  is  within  tlie 
body,  or  outsidr  ot'  it?  'l  ake  \vat*>r,  uixl  fill  it  into  a  big  jug. 
WIkmi  tin*  jug  breaks,  the  water  flow s  to  tin*  earth,  hut  can  tl"' 
water  on  the  floor  be  dillerent  lVoiu  that  in  t)w  jii";?  Tl»e  \vat»*»" 
on  the  floor  is  not  tliH'en'nt  from  tliat  iti  the  jug,  then  wliy 
sliuuld  the  vital  fortM4  outside  the  hody  be  different  from  that 
within? 

Since  a  man,  when 山' a(l，  does  not  become  u  ghost,  has  uo 
knowledge,  and  cannot  speak,  lie  oannot  hurt  others  eitlicr  for 
llu-  following  reason.  In  liis  an^er,  a  man  uses  breath,  but  in 
onler  to  injure  others.  \w  requires  strcu^tli.  To  make  use  of  it, 
his  sinews  and  bones  must  lie  strong,  then  ho  can  hurt  others. 
An  angry  man  may  breatlu'  licavily  so  near  to  others,  that  his 
I >reat  1 1  shoots  forth  against  their  faces,  but  thougli  he  possess  the 


Digitized  by  Google 

-C—  -T^S=  ' -—  


Oh  Doatl.. 


190 


valour  of  Meng  /V",1  it  do«\s  them  no  harm.  However,  when  he 
stretches  out  his  hand,  and  strikes,  or  lifts  the  foot  and  kicks,  he 
breaks  whatever  he  hits.  I  I le  bones  of  the  dt*ad  tlei-ay,  the  stn-n^th 
of  muscles  is  lost,  and  lie  (loos  not  lift  liantl  or  loot.  Altliougli 
tlie  vital  Huid  he  still  existant.  it  is,  as  if  it  、v('n、  only  breath- 
ing, ami  nothing  t'lsc  follows.  I  low  then  should  it  do  h.irm  to 
anybody? 

M«'n  and  other  creaturps  hurt  others  by  means  of  knives, 
which  they  grasp  witli  their  hands  and  arms,  and  with  their  strong 
and  sharp  nails  or  teeth.  Now,  when  a  man  is  dead,  his  hands 
and  arms  waste  away,  and  cannot  lift  ;i  blade  any  more,  and  nails 
and  teeth  fall  out.  and  cannot  bit<*  any  moro.  How  slumld  tliey 
do  harm  to  others  tlien? 

When  a  child  is  just  born,  his  hands  and  f«*<'t  arc  quite 
rompletf,  yot  tlie  hands  cannot  <ira8[>,  and  the  foet  cannot  kick. 
The  tluid  has  just  concreted,  but  lias  no  stn'iij^tli.  Ileuoe  it  is 
evident  that  the  vital  tluid  possesses  no  strength.  The  fluid  for  ins 
tlie  body.  As  Ionj;  as  the  body  is  still  fecMc  and  weak,  it  cannot 
do  harm  to  any  one,  and  how  much  loss  still,  whon  through  death 
the  Huid  becomes  lost,  and  tlie  vital  spirit  is  dissolved.  Something 
feeble  and  weak  is  uncapable  of  iu.juriny;  people,  and  one  asserts 
that  cold  bones  can  do  it?  Is  the  fluid  of  tl"、  dead  not  lost  ?  How 
should  it  injure  anybody  ？ 

Before  a  lien's  t'fjg  is  liatcht'd,  tlicir  is  a  formless  mass  in  the 
egg-shell,  which,  on  lenkiiig;  out,  looks  like  water.  After  a  »oo(l 
hen  lias  covered  the  egg,  the  body  of  the  chicken  is  l'onncd.  and 
wlien  it  lias  bw'n  roinpletvd,  the  young  bird  cun  [»ick  the  shell, 
and  kick.  Human  doatlj  res^mbh-s  tlie  lime  of  thv  form  loss  mass. 
How  could  a  formless  fluid  hurt  anybody? 

A  man  bccomcH  bold  and  fierce,  so  that  1"'  can  assault  othfis. 
by  eating  and  tlrinkiiig.  Kating  and  drinking  his  fill,  he  tjrows 
stout  and  strong,  bold  and  fierce,  and  can  do  harm  to  otlu-r.s. 
While  a  man  is  sick,  he  can  neither  eat  nor  drink,  and  his  body 
becomes  worn  out  and  weak.  Wlien  this  w<'ariness  and  languor 
reach  the  lii^ltest  degree,  death  ensues.  During  that  time  of  sick- 
ness and  languor  his  enemy  may  stand  by  his  side,  he  cannot 
revile  him,  and  a  thit'f  may  take  liis  thin^u  away,  lie  has  no  means 
to  prevent  him,  all  on  account  liis  debility  and  lassitude.  Death 
is  the  flehility  and  languor  in  tlie  extreme,  how  then  rould  a  man 
after  death  still  injure  any  one  ？ 

»  Cf.  Cliap.  XXXL 


Digitized  by  Google 


200 


Lun  -  \1(-1\>1：   B.  MotnpliVNical. 


If  chickens  or  do<j8.  which  somebody  keeps,  are  stolen,  lie 
will,  at  all  events,  wax  anjiiv,  though  he  bo  timid,  and  not  very 
strong,  and  his  anger  may  bv  so  violent,  that  lie  tries  ronrliisioiis 
with  tlie  roldior,  <uul  is  slain  by  liiin.  During  the  time  ol*  givat 
； ttian'liy  pcopN*  will  use  one  anotltcr  as  food.  Now,  provided  that 
the  spirit,  was  n)ns<'ioiiH,  it  outilit  in  ho  able  to  <l<-stroy  its  en- 
emies.1  A  liuinuii  l>ody  is  worth  nioro  tluui  a  chicken  or  a  dog. 
and  olio's  own  death  is  of  greater  ronscqut'nee  than  a  robben*. 
Plu*  fad  that  ;i  man  is  excit,、（l  ovt'r  a  rlii»:ki«n  or  a  dog,  but  lias 
uo  bad  lerlin^  ； ii>ainst  tlu'  individual  who  devoured  him,  shows 
that  he  -  has  not  tin-  power  to  liurt  anv  one. 

Prior  to  its  casting  oiV  its  exuvijo.  a  cicada  is  a  diiysalis. 
When  it  casts  them  oil',  it  leaves  tin*  pupa  state,  and  is  transformed 
into  a  cicada.  Tlu*  vital  spirit  of  a  deatl  man  leaving  the  body 
may  be  compared  to  the  cicada  oim'rging  from  flip  chrysalis.  As 
cicada  it  cannot  hurt  tl"'  clirysalides.  Since  it  i:ai"iot  do  so,  why 
should  tli»'  vital  spirit  of  a  drad  man  hurt  living  boditV.' 

Tlie  real  tiaturt'  of  dreams  is  very  jloubtful.  Some  say  tl»at, 
while  people  are  d reaming,  their  vital  spirits  romain  in  their  bodirs, 
and  produce  lm  ky  or  unlucky  visions.  Otliers  li(»!d  that  the  vital 
spirit  ('<»inmuiii<-at('s  with  men  ami  other  creatures.  Now,  if  it 
n-ally  remains  in  the  l»o<ly,  tl"'  vital  spirit  of  tl"、  dead  must  do 
tin*  .sjiiih'.  IT.  lio、vevt>r,  tlie  spirit  mixes  with  iiumi.  people  may 
drea m  that  tli^v  have  kilKnl  somebody.  Having  killed  somebody, 
they  are  perhaps  tlicmsrlvcs  murdered  by  somebody  flse.  But  if. 
on  the  t'ollo\viii<»  day.  tlu-v  look  at  tlu*  body  of  that  person,  or 
examine  tlieir  own,  tlu'v  will  find  110  trace  wharever  of  a  wound 
inllii'tctl  by  a  sword.  Dnvuns  a  i  t*  caused  by  the  vital  spirit,  and 
this  spirit  is  identical  with  the  vital  spirit  of  tlio  dead.  The  vital 
spirit  of  <lrcams  cannot  injure  people,  tliorelore  tlie  spirit  of  the 
dead  cannot  do  sd  either. 

W  lieu  tlio  Ur"  burns,  tlio  raldron  hoils.  ami  wlion  the  boiling 
«toj)s,  the  stoum  ceases.  All  deptMids  on  the  lirt*.  When  tlie  vital 
spirit  is  incensed,  it  can  do  liarm.  not  being  angry,  it  cannot  injure 
people.  Tlie  fire  bla/in<>  in  tin1  stove,  the  kettle  bubbles,  and 
tlie  steam  rises.  When  the  vital  force  is  ("iragtni  in  the  bosom, 
there  is  an  innervation  of  strength,  and  the  body  is  hot.  Now. 
when  a  man  is  about  to  die,  his  body  is  cold  and  chilly.  The 
cold  and  cliillincss  im-rcase,  until  at  last  he  expires.    At  tlie  time 


1  Those  who  used  its  body  as  food. 
- His  spirit. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Deatli. 


201 


of  death,  the  vital  8j»jrit  is  not  irritated,  and  aftt-r  tin-  deatli  of 
the  body  it  is  like  tlie  hot  water  taken  from  the  caldron,  liow 
should  it  hurt  people? 

Things  have  a  certain  relation  to  man.  When  a  man  becomes 
insane,  ami  one  knows  the  projier  thing,  liis  malady  may  b,'  cured 
by  applying  this  thing  as  a  remedy.  As  long  as  a  tiling  is  alive, 
its  vital  spirit  adheres  to  its  body,  and  consetpiently  can  change 
its  form,  and  enter  into  close  e'onueftion  witli  man.  After  it  lias 
dietl,  its  body  rots,  and  the  vital  spirit  is  dispersed.  In  default 
of  a  substratum  it  cannot  undergo  any  more,  clianges.  The  huniun 
vital  spirit  is  like  that  of  tilings.  While  they  are  alive,  their  spirit 
may  become  sick,  when  they  die,  it  evaporates  and  disappears. 
M <*n  are  like  tilings  in  this  respect,  when  they  (l"、，  their  vital  spirit 
also  becomes  extinguished,  how  could  it  still  do  any  iniseljief? 

Should  anybody  object  by  saying  that  men  are  much  more 
|)re<;ioii8  than  tilings,  and  that  their  vital  spirit  is  ilillVrent.  we  can 
reply  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  things  can  be  metaniorpliosetl,  but 
man  cannot,  and  that  so  far  his  vital  spirit  is  on  the  contrary 
inferior  to  that  of  things,  whoso  essence  surpasses  that  of  man. 

Water  and  tin-  drown  and  burn.  All  tliat  can  injure  man 
must  be  a  substance  bclotiging  to  out*  of  the  five  elements.  Metal 
hurts  man,  wood  boats  him.  earth  crushes  him,  water  drowns  him, 
and  fire  burns  him.  Is  the  vital  spirit  oi*  the  dead  a  substance 
like  the  live  elements?  Does  it  injure  peopk',  or  is  it  not  a  sub- 
stance?― It  cannot  injure  [>eoj>le.  Not  being  a  substaiicr,  it  must 
be  a  fluid.  Of  the  fluids  wliioli  injure  man  that  of  the  sun  is  the 
ai(»st  virulent.  Dot's  tlie  fluid  of  a  man,  when  he  dies,  bemme 
virulent?  Can  it  injure  people  or  not?— It  cannot  injure  people. 

Thus  we  hold  that  tlie  dead  do  not  beconu;  ghosts,  are  not . 
<'oii8oious,  and  cannot  hurt  peoj)lo.    Consequently,  it  is  evident  th»t 
the  gliosts,  which  arc  seen,  arc  not  the  vital  force  of  dead  men, 
and  that,  when  men  have  been  hurt,   it  cannot  have  been  dour 
through  this  vital  force. 


202 


I.tiii-Hriig:  H.  Mcta[)liy.si«;il. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
False  Reports  about  the  Dead  (Sse-wei). 

King  11^ Han  of  the  Chou  dynasty 1  is  reported  to  have  killed 
his  minister,  tlio  Karl  of  'l，"，  who  was  innocent.  When  King  Ihii/m 
was  going  to  hunt  in  his  park,  tlie  Karl  of  '/•'/  rose  on  the  road- 
side with  a  ml  bow  in  Iiis  loi't  hand,  lie  shot  an  arrow  at  tlie 
king,  who  oxjiircd  under  the  ovor  of  his  own  how-case.3 — I)uk<' 
(It ii'ii  oC  (7mo3  put  his  minister  ( '/ninny  7>r  Yi  to  death,  although 
he  was  innocctit.  When  Duke  Ch'ifu  was  about  to  pass  through 
the  1 1  nan  gate,  ('huninj  T"'  Yi  apprarcd  on  tlio  road,  a  red  cudgel 
in  his  left  liancl,  uitli  which  lie  struck  tlie  duke,  that  he  died  under 
his  carria«»i».  This  is  considorod  as  provitii;  that  two  dead  persons 
bccjnne  ghosts,  and  as  sliowing  tliat  ghosts  are  conscious,  and  can 
hurt  people,  and  that  tlirrr  is  no  help  against  it. 

1  say  that  man  is  created  as  one  of  tlu-  ten  thousand  creatures. 
Wlit'u  these  creatures  die,  they  do  not  become  ghosts,  wliy  then 
must  man  alone  become  a  tjhost  after  (1,'atli?  If  it  be  o、ving  to 
bin  superiority  that  man  i;an  become  a  fjliost,  thou  all  the  dead 
ought  to  \w  ttanslbrmed  into  ghosts,  wln'rcioie  then  did  the  Earl 
of  Tit  and  Clautuy  Tm-  Yi  alone  become  gliosts.'  If  those  who  liavt- 
imiocontly  sull'tMrd  can  biM-onic  iiliosts,  tliero  have  be<Mi  a  great 
many  ministers  thus  wronged.  M«mi  like  l，;  Kan  and  Tse  Ihil 4  did 
not  bfcome  ghosts.  Now.  tlio  Karl  of  '/•"  and  Chtumg  7:"'  Yi  were 
immoral.  Full  <»f  spite  and  hate,  tlioy  assassinaMl  tlu-ir  sovereigns, 
out  of  n'vciigf.  Tliciv  is  no  crime  worse  tlian  the  assassination 
of  one's  so\ civign.  Those  wlio  weir  doomed  worthy  to  become 
ghosts,  would  again  have  to  1)"  cxiMuited.  Tlien'iorc  tlie  Karl  <»f 
Tu  and  Chwtng  Tse  Yi  would  certainly  not  liav<*  dared  to  commit 
such  a  crime. 

1  K27-781  B.r. 

2  The  story  is  given  a  little  more  in  detail  in  tlie  ('Aon  (h'un-chht,  which 
adds  that  tlie  king  broke  Iiis  spine  (i-f.  f  'fun  anntu,  M>m.  Hisi.  Vol.  I,  p.  278,  Note  2) 
and  also  hy  Mr  Ti  chap.  8.  |>.  2. 

3  In  the  Ltin-hf'»g  Bk.  IV,  p.  :*>  iShn-funi)  he  \s  called  Viscount  <'hien  of  Chao, 
tlie  same  who  is  mentioned  in  chap.  XVII. 

4  On  their  fates  d.  p.  140  and  chap.  XXXIX. 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Report's  about  the  Dead. 


203 


When  one  man  injures  another,  he  does  not  wisli  him  to  live, 
and  hatos  to  see  his  person.  Therelore  he  docs  away  with  liim. 
ThtMi  not  only  the  family  of  the  murdered  man  fjoes  to  the  magis- 
trate, and  lodges  a  coiiiplamt  against  tluur  enemy,  but  the  victim 
also  must  hato  to  see  him.  \M'e  and  deatli  arc  (lillVmit.  spheres, 
and  men  and  ghosts  live  in  different  places.  If,  therefore,  the  Earl 
of  Tu  and  ( Inmng  Tsc  Yi  were  grieved  at  King  H."'"i"  and  Duke 
Ch wii,  they  shouUl  not  have  killed  tlicm,  for  then  tliey  would  also 
have  become  gliosts,  and  again  have  been  together  with  them. 

Princes  have  great  power,  and  their  oi'Htrers,  guards,  and  under- 
liiifTS  are  very  numerous.  Had  the  two  ministors  killed  the  two 
princes,  their  deatha  would  liavc  bven  aven«j;r(L  Therefore  no  in- 
telligent man  would  liavt*  madt'  such  a  sclR'tno.  or  rommittiMl  such 
an  act  in  liis  wrath.  It'  the  two  ministers  were  spirits,  they  must 
have  bei'ii  aware  that  the  deaths  of  the  two  princes  would  be 
aven^'d  upon  them,  and.  if  tliey  u  ere  not  aware  of  it.  tht'n  tlifv 
were  not  spirits  either,  and  not  being  spirits,  how  could  tliey  have 
injured  anybody?  In  tlie  world  many  things  see  in  real,  wliich  are 
not,  and  there  are  many  f'aUolioods,  wliioh  are  talu'ii  for  trutlis. 
Thus  the  stories  of  the  Karl  o(  T"  and  Chuting  7:、,  Yi  have  hoen 
handed  down. 

[Duke  I  hi  of  Chin  removed  the  i*ro\vn-j»rince  S/i^n  S/,Mf/ 1  from 
his  grave,  and  had  him  re-interred.  When  in  autuinu  his  charioteer 
Hit  Tu  went  to  llsut-kuo,2  lie  met  the  crow  n-pritu  r  there.  The  crown- 
prince  stepped  upon  his  carriage,  and  spoke  to  him  saying,  .•  /  Wu 3 
is  a  brute.  I  liave  asked  (； od.  He  \\\\\  give  Chin  over  to  Cli  nt, 
and  Chin  will  oiler  sarrifirc  to  mo. "  —  ////  Tu  rq,l"'d,  "I  have  been 
told  that  spirits  enjoy  only  the  offering  of  tlifir  own  kindred,  and 
that  people  do  not  sacrifice  but  to  tlieir  own  clan.  Would  the 
sacrifice  to  Your  Highness  not  hv,  terminated  then'.'  Besides  tlic 
people  of  Chin  are  not  responsible.  Their  punislimciit  would  bo 
unjust,  and  then*  、v()ul(l  be  tlie  cessation  of  tlie  saci'iH,'"  Your 
lligliness  should  take  tliis  into  consideration." ― The  (rrown- prince 
said,  "  Well,  I  will  pray  a^ain.  Seven  days  l"、i"，t*.  there  will  be 
a  wizard  、v,'st  of  tlie  Ncnv  City,  tliroiiifli  whom  you  sliall  havr  an 
interview  with  mt'."  After  //"  Tu  )i;i<l  agreed  to  it,  lie  vaiiislicd. 
At  the  fixed  time,  ffu  Tu  went  to  the  hut  of  a  wizard  on  the  west 

1  A  hrother  of  the  Duke,  wlio  iiad  liei'ii  driven  into  doatli  hy  *'<»urt  intrigtieN. 
1  Tiic  "  Lower  CapitHl  "  of  <  hin  i.  e.  (  'h  u-irn  in  inodei  n  Pinp-yaruj-Ju  {Sharutt). 
a  Tlie  personal  name      Duke  Hut. 


Digitized  by  Google 


204 


Luii-Hrng:  B.  Motiiphysionl. 


side  of  the  Ntnv  City,  and  had  a  second  interview  with  Shin  Slteng. 
Sluhi  Sheng  told  him.  "(； o(l  has  proinist'd  to  punisli  tlie  guilty  one. 
He  will  slay  him  in  //a«."J 1  Four  years  latt'r  Duko  Ilui  fought 
with  Duke  Mu  of  Ch  in  in  tlu*  Han  t»>rritor\ and  w  as  taken  prisoner 
by  Duke  Mu,  exartly  as  liad  hcon  [muYwXii].  Wliat  else  was  this 
tlian  the  work  of  u  spirit*' 

Tliis  storv  hears  »  great  rw"ihl;iii<v  to  tluiso  of  tlie  Earl  of 
Tn  and  Clnmng  Tsc  Yi.  How  can  w  e  sliow  that  ？  The  removal  of 
a  j^rave  is  a  private  grievance,  (iod  is  a  public  spirit.  Would  a 
p\ihlic  spirit  take  lict'tl  of  a  complaint  addrossr<l  to  him  on  a  private 
grirvancr?  (."—"1  is  said  to  have  proinisoil  to  ('hin  m't'r  to  CU  in. 
Ilu  Tu  thouo;lit  that  this  vouhl  not  1,".  S/ieng  following  I  hi 

Tu's  words,  was  quite  ri«;lit,  and  tliercfon1  God's  ])roniise  to  H/int 
S/ieng  was  wrong.  Ir  is  evident  that  a  spirit  、vli"'li  as  (Jod  would 
be  inferior  to  llu  Tu,  cannot  I"'  God. 

FurtluTmore,  a  stibjtvt  dares  not  iin|)l<nv  a  sovereign  to  con- 
sider his  privato  a  flairs.  A  soveivign  has  sucli  an  oxaltt'd  position 
in  《'(>mparison  with  a  huinhlo  subject,  that  the  latter  does  not 
venture  to  troubl**  him  with  things  that  do  not  ('om'i'ni  him.  Ami 
was  tlu*  ilislaiu-o  l^otwecn  S/k:h  S/triif/  and  (iod  not  still  greater  tliau 
between  a  subjoot  and  liis  sovrn-i^n?  lie  wduld  not  liavr  vd 
his  anger  auainst  Dukr  Ilui  lor  lia、'iiig  removed  his  grave  in  the 
^u^ust  prescuot*  of  (icul. 

Li  C/ii3  caused  tlu1  death  ("'  S/ieog  by  l"'r  slander,  and 
Duke  Ilui  rt' moved  his  (*or|)sc  from  (lis  grave.  The  ronioval  of  a 
corps,'  is  K>ss  wicked  tli;it)  a  munler.  and  the  guilt  oi'  Duke  Ilui 
less  than  that  of  Li  Chi.    If  Shm  pray«Ml  lor  tho  puuishtneut 

of  Duke  //"/，  anil  not  for  tho  death  of  Li  ( 'hi,  tlicn  lie  ivsented  the 
removal  of  his  gravt',  but  was  not  ^rii'vcd  at  liis  own  (loath. 

By  the  iitlvire  of  Li  Ssc,  ( 7i  in  6/"h  Ihumg  17  burnrd  the  books 
of  poetry  and  history,  and  sul>st'(|ueiitly  l)urietl  tlie  Mi-holars  alive. 
The  gri''vam、es  of  tlie  Iit«*rati  against  liim  w  ore  not  of  a  less  serious 
character  than  those  of  S/k'h  Sl^ng,  uixl  the  inis<'ry  of  being  buried 
alive,  inucli  more  |iitit'ul  than  the  removal  of  a  corpsi*.  Yet  the  dead 
scholars  of  Ch  in  did  not  implore  God.  nor  appear  in  the  shapes 
of  ghosts,  and  those  snvanU  did  not  conjointly  accuse  Ch  in  ShiJi 
Huang  Ti  of  viciousness.  and  Li  Sse  of  depravity. 

1  Quotation  from  the  Tm-chuan,  Duke  Hn  KHh  year  (049  b.c,  Ugge,  CUuuriat 
Vol.  V,  Pt.  I，  p.  157). 
, In  Sfiansi. 

3  A  wife  of  Duke  Iltirn  of  <  hin,  who,  in  order  to  secure  the  tlirone  for  her 
own  son,  removed  the  lioir-appareut,  Sh'.n  S/x'^y. 


Digitized  by  Google 


F«I«c  Reports  "、out  x\w  Dead. 


2(15 


\V lien  Killer  W'u  of  the  C/iou  dynasty  was  s"'k  and  low-spir- 
ited, the  Duke  of  Chou  asked  for  Heavea's  commands.  He  erected 
three  altars  witli  "m-  jilatlonn  for  sju'tiliccs,  and  with  ll"'  ja<U* 
scoptre  and  the  baton  in  liis  liai"l、  ad 山' 《'sst、d  T  ai  Wang,  Wany  ( 'hi 
and  HV«  Wang.1  The  annalist  composed  tlic  prayer.  In  liis  address 
In*  said."  I  請 brnt'volont  likr  my  amvstors.  liavr  many  talents 
and  abilities,  ami  can  serve  the  spirits,  l'lie  «ireat-j;ran(ls<)ii  .so-aiul- 
so  lias  not  a.s  many  talrnts  <»r  abilities  as  Ian,  and  caimot  serve 
tlu*  si)iritM." 3-  Bv  spirits  tin*  tlin'c  |)rin<'<'s  aro  meant.  The  dead 
ar''  uiH'onsirioii!*.  aixl  cannot  h''<.om,'  spirit's  they  say.  How  cvrr, 
tlie  l)uk，'  of  ( 'hou  was  a  s;w;  tlic  \\ onls  of  a  an*  tr'"'，  an<l 

h*'  finds  out  t he  n'ality  of  tilings  that  seem  dark.    Such  being  the 

the  tlim'  jiriiux's  nni^t  have  been  spirits. 

I  a^k,  can  im'ii  really  h'vome  spirits  or  not?  Providod,  tht'y 
cati,  tlit'n  (»no  must  know  tho  opinions  of  the  three  princes,  and, 
not  M)lcly  iinjuiiv,  wlicthrr  tlit'v  \vt*r«'  gliosis.  Tlie  I)iike  of  Chou 
asked  for  HraviMi's  coimuands,  and  tlh*  annalist  roni posed  tilt*  prayer. 
Whon  the  prayer  wsis  coinplctcd,  ami  the  adtlross  linisluMl,  the 
Duke  of  Cliou  diil  not  know,  \vliotli«>r  the  three  princes  gave  their 
assi'nt,  and  liou .  Upon  this  \\v  cousultcd  tliroc  tortoist-s.  All  three 
bearing  lucky  signs,  he  was  pleased.  He  was  abli*  to  know  that 
tin-  tlm'r  princt's  were  conscious  ami  spirits,  but  not.  vvlietlier  tlu-y 
as;>t'!it<*(l  or  not.  T"  find  out  the  trutli,  lie  was  obliged  to  still 
•onsult  tli,'  tUrrr  tortoises.  Vet  in  onli-r  to  (letrrminc  in  an  un- 
mistakable way,  w  lirtlior  tliev  werr  spirits  or  not,  it  should  havo 
been  possibK-  to  iiit,'rr('ga"'  tlii'in.  Tl"、  qm'"i("i，  wln'tluT  the  (IojkI 
had  kiio\vled»o  or  not,  (Icju-ntlcd  on  tlie  otln'r,  whotlifr  tliey  i-ould 
ijive  i  heir  approval  or  not.  If  tlir  Duke  <»i'  ( 'hon  could  know  that 
tli«»  three  priiurs  did  not  jjrant  his  ，v(i"»、sf,  then  tl"'  statement 
that  Hiey  wen*  ghosts  is  reliable,  but  if*  In*  rould  not,  then  his 
stat<»mfnt  that  the  j»rinci's  wen*  ghosts,  would  not  liavc  any 

more  \vi'i«;lit  tlian  one  111a 山、 liy  onliuarv  p«*oj)U*.  Ilis  kuo、vl*'dge 
would  not  rear  1 1  furtlu'r  than  that  of  the  generality,  and  be  inadc- 
quatt*  to  show  us  tlu*  r«';il  state  of  the  tloud. 

Mort'over.  bv  wliat  moiiiis  did  tlx;  Duke  of  Chou  obtain  Heaven's 
commands,  by  his  perlVct  siurt-rity,  or  by  tli**  correct noss  of  his 
address?  If  it  w as  l>y  his  perfect  sincerity,  then  his  prayer  \\ as 
said  witli  sim'«'i'ity,  and  I"'  did  in»l  caiv.  u  lictlier  his  address  to 

1  The  spirits  of  the  fa  titer,  tlic  gcandfatlior,  and  the  grcat-grandfatlier  of 
King  Wu  and  liis  y<»iaii{;er  l)rotli<-r  'I'tw,  Duke  of  f  7t<>n. 

2  Quoted  in  an  ahritlged  form  from  Sh, 卜 ki"<j、  <  hm-t'niy,  I't.  V.  Bk.  VI,  1  svi[. 
(Le(f</e  Vol.  Ill,  I't.  II,  J).  ：{.'» I  scq.). 


Digitized  by  Google 


206  L.m-IKu.g:  B.  Metaphysical. 

attract  the  spirits  was  correct  or  not.  Tuny  Chung  S/m's  inrtliod  oi' 
praying  lor  rain  coiiNisti'd  in  |>uttiug  u|>  a  dragon,  made  ot'  earth, 
witli  a  vit'、v  to  an'*、《'ting  tlu'  lluid.  An  earth  dni^on  was  not  a  reul 
dragon,  and  cotild  not  attract  rain.  Whilr  niakin<r  use  of  it.  Twig 
(，li""g  Sim  showed  jicrlVct  siiuu'i  ity.  and  did  not  mind,  w  lu-ther  tlic 
<lra«on  w  as  genuine  or  ti»-ti<Mous.  Tlic  Duke  of  ( '/ion's  prayer  for 
Heaven's  connnands  、、  ： is  like  Tung  Clamg  Shu  a  prayer  lor  rain.  The 
tlirre  priiu-t's  、、- m*  not  ^liosts.  as  a         ,)i'«'ai'tli  was  not  a  dragon. 


Ihii"  Yen  of  Chin  1  invaded  Ch  i,  but  had  to  return,  hpforr  the 
cam|iaigu  caine  "、  a  rlost",  lor  lie  、v;is  taken  ill  with  uIiti*s,  ntul  a 
son*  broke  out  on  his  liead.  Whi'ii  lie  readied  the  Clio-fjung  terri- 
lory,  iiis  eyes  protrmlod  I'roin  their  sockrts,  and  wlien  liis  dcatli 
•Misueil,  I"'  went  oti  staring,  and  liis  mouth  could  not  reooivi'  any- 
tliiug.  Fan  1 1 aii  ft  a  T -、  c  wasluvl  liiin.  and  said  l>y  w  Jiy  o(  consolation, 
"To  serve  uiul«'r  Your  Lonlsliip  was  docidrdly  hotter  than  under 
H'm,"  but  he  still  rontimu-d  staling.  Fan  llsihin  Tse  observing  that 
be  did  not  close  his  eyes,  fancied  thai  lie  was  vexed  with  liis  son 
Wit,  i'ov  vexation  witli  one's  own  son  is  ;»  very  common  liumaii 
grievance.  Tlicrcfore.  Iio  sjiokc  of  W'n  to  romfoit  liiin,  Imt  this 
was  not  the  cause  of  liis  irst>utiiu'ii(.  for  lie  went  on  staring.  I.unn 
//".'〃•  T.se  n'inaik«-(l,  "Is  it  |"、rli;ips,  boranse  li<>  did  not  i'oi"| 山 Mr  liis 
<l<'sin;ns  in  Ch  i!  *',  and  hr  again  ,'<，1"1'<"1<'<1  liiin  l>v  saying.  "  Your 
Lordship  dit'd  nu  untiinclv  <l««atli.  Thr  tilings  、vliirli  you  did  nol 
bring  to  a  i-losc  iti  Ch  i.  arc  as  vast  as  the  Yellow  Hivt-r."  Upon 
this,  he  closetl  his  eye!*,  ami  iv,vivr(l  llie  »nn  into  liis  mouth.'  It  w  as 
the  in(!oni})lcteiH>ss  of  his  invasion  of  Ch  i  which  Hsiin  Yen  roi^n'tted. 
Lunn  If'""  'Isc  found  it  out,  t  lie  re  fort*  the  dca«l  man  closed  his  cy's, 
and  received  the  fin  into  his  nioutli.  Fan  Ihilan  Tse  mi^svd  it, 
therefore  liis  oves  remained  \vid»*  open,  and  liis  moutli  was  lockc<l. 

I  say  that  / fxihi  Yen's  (l«>atli  by  sickiu'ss  was  very  painful,  s() 
tliat  liis  eyes  protrmled.  When  his  eyes  came  out,  he  firmly  closed 
his  moutli,  and  there  ton*  rould  not  rcreivc  anytlnng  in  it.  Tm- 
iiUMliatcly  after  death  t\\o  fluid  was  still  strong,  and  the  eyes  pro- 
truded owing  to  tli«'  pain  caused  l)y  the  disease.  Fan  HsUan  Tse 
sootln'd  liijn  too  soon,  therefore  the  eyes  did  not  close,  and  the 
inouth  not  open.  A  short  while  afterwards,  the  fluid  was  weakeued. 

1  An  officer  of  the  Chin  State. 

'2  As  was  customary.  Thus  far  the  story,  with  some  additions  and  omissions, 
lias  been  culled  from  tlie  Tm-tUiutn,  Duke  Hmany  l'Jth  year  (53；{  b.c). 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  aliout  tlie  I><、a(i. 


'207 


Consequently,  when  Luau  Hitai  T.、e  t'm'""rt'、"  him.  liis  eyes  closed, 
and  liis  mouth  received  tlie  gt'm.  This  was  a  sociuenoo  of  〃、； in 
Yen's  sickness,  ami  tlie  soul  of  the  docoa st*<l  did  tu»t  tnanifrst  liis 
resentment  in  his  niouth  and  liis  eyes. 

All  people  have  soinothing  to  regret,  when  thoy  die  A  gen- 
erous character  regrets  that  lie  could  not  at'coinnlisli  the  good 
works  he  int«'nde(l.  a  scliolar  that  his  rcscjirchos  liad  still  so  many 
lacunrf,  a  liusbandiuan  tliat  lie  <1i<]  not  ivap  the  grain  lie  had  sown,  u 
inerrhant  that  ho  did  not  make  a  fortunr,  an  oflicial  tliat  lie  did  not 
obtain  the  liigliest  |K>sts.  nixl  a  bra vc  that  his  attaimm'nts  wore  not  yot 
perfect.  Evcrv*  one  on  earth  who  lias  desires,  has  soinetliing  to  regret. 
If  in  every  t:a«o  regrets  Ik'  ••oiisidorcd  the  cause  of  the  non-closing 
(，l.  tlie  eyes,  then  all  the.  (K-a<l  on  earth  rould  not  slmt  their  Q\cn. 

The  souls  of  tlie  doa<l  an*  dissolved,  and  ran  not  hear  jmy 
more  what  inrn  say.  This  inability  t(t  hear  what  otliers  say  is 
railed  death.  If  alter  their  srpuration  from  the  body  tliey  I" 乂' aim' 
ghosts,  and  kept  near  to  men,  tlifir  <-oniiefti()ii  with  the  body  would 
already  have  been  sevcre<l,  and.  though  people  addressed  tliein,  it 
would  be  im|)ossiMe  Cor  them  to  a«;aiii  enter  the  body,  atul  close 
the  eyes,  or  <>|m'u  the  mouth.  If  they  rould  entor  the  body,  and 
tiirougli  the  corpsr  express  \ho\v  dissatisfai-tion,  then  tlio  inevitable 
c<"iwqu,'m't'  \v<ml<l  bo  that  tliey  must  have  been  j»rcs<*rved  together 
with  the  bfxly.  Ordinary  |>oo|»1p  hold  that  the  spirits  of  tlie  dead 
can,  so  t(»  speak,  rt'-aniinate  the  hodies,  and  show  themselves  so, 
that  corpses  would  bo  like  living  nieu,  wliicli  is  a  great  mistako. 

King  Ci I  i'i>ff  ol'  67/  n  1  s«>t  aside  t\\o  licir-Jipparent  S/mug  Chen. 
and  wislicd  to  |>u(  I'rincr  C/n'/i  in  his  plare.  When  S/iang  C/ieit 
heard  of  it.  be  sunouudrd  tlie  king  witli  tlie  palacr  ouanU,  and 
made  him  [nisoner.  The  king  d«'sire<l  to  oat  bear's  |m 、、- before 
he  was  put  to  death,  hut  S/tang  Chen  did  not  grant  tliis  request, 
and  the  king  died  by  strani!,ulation.  S/mng  Chen  gave  liim  tlie  post- 
humous title  Liriff,  but  tl"，  king  did  not  ； shut  lii<s  eyes.  Then  lie 
called  him  Clt  eng,  and  lie  closed  liis  eyt'^.*  I  liis  «'irou instance  that 
lie  closed  his  eyes  on  called  <  h  mg.  but  not  on  beinp;  railed 

Lhg,  proves  tliat  King  Cli  eng  had  consciousness.  Tlie  postliuiiioiis 
title  Ling  dis[>I(*ased  him.  tlu'n*lV>r«*  In*  did  not  shut  liis  eyes.  \VIi*mi 
it  was  altered  into  ( 7i  enf/,  his  liu i  t  iV^lings  wen*  inollilied,  \vl Here- 
upon he  closed  his  eyes.    His  spirit  heard  people  ronsult,  and  saw 

>  670  024  ,!.《'. 

a  Quotation  from  the  7V'-,,/""/n  Duke  \V<'n  1st  year  ((52  5  B.r.)  {I^egye  Vol.  V, 
Pt.  I,  p.  230). 


Digitized  by  Google 


208  Luii-Hriig:  B.  Mctapliysiral. 

th em  change  the  titl»\  Tliis  gave  liim  sucli  satisfaction,  that  he 
closed  his  eyes.  Tliey  were  i"、t  sifk,  anil  nobody  soothed  him.  The 
eyes  opened,  and  closed  of  tlieir  own  arcord :  it*  that  was  not  spir- 
itual, wliat  olsi'  was  it? 

I  am  of  opinion  that  this  story  is  like  fhat  oi'  llsiin  Yen.  Al- 
though tlie  ryes  were  not  sick,  tliry  did  not  remain  open  for  Jiot!iin<;. 
Wlien  King  CU' eng  tlio<l  ljy  strangulation,  liis  vital  fluid  was  still 
strong,  and,  wIkmi  his  life  w  as  suddonly  cut  off,  liis  «*v«*s  still  ojKHie<l. 
Owing  to  this  (lit1  opitlu-t  ]Au(j 1  was  given  liim.  After  a  short 
while,  tl"'  lluid  iv1hx<m1.  and  the  eyes  weve  just  goini;  to  close, 
when  simultaneously  liis  title  was  rlumgi'd  into  Clieng.'  It  was  by 
chance  that  the  stariii^  and  the  shutting  of  the  eyes  t>oim，i(le(l 
vvitli  the  selection  ol*  Limj  as  a  j»ostliumous  title.  The  pfople  of 
that  time,  noticing  that  the  kiiig  shut  his  eyos  a«  if  iii  response 
to  tho  title  U"itg,  ！) elieved  fliat  it  was  tlu*  soul  of  King  Ch'emj. 
If  he  was  really  oonsoicnis,  he  ought  never  to  have  closed  liis  eyes, 
for  the  muni  or  oonunitt«'cl  by  the  lioir-a|>par<Mit  upon  liis  person 
was  a  Iummous  ''riiiw,  wliercas  tin-  sfloction  of  tli,'  word  Ling  :us  a 
]>osthuinoiis  titlr  was  only  a  small  fault.  lit*  ilid  not  resent  tl"' 
great  criim*,  but  took  ofTom'c  at  tln>  small  fault.  That  docs  not 
make  the  existetu'e  of  u  spirit  probable,  ami  would  not  sti'in  a 
reliable  uttrranrc  of  liis  lVelin^s.  Of  impro|"'r  ))ostltuinous  titles 
we  have  not  only  Ling  but  also  />'•••，  In  tlie  ammls  muity  princes 
bearing  the  epithets  Ling  and  Li  ix re  incntioncd.  Tlicy  (lid  not  all 
keep  their  eyes  open,  bi'fon*  tlu'ir  bodies  were  sliroudtMl.  Did  tin1 
dead  prino's  of  llio  various  a^«'s  not  resent  tlic  uainc,  and  was  it 
King  d'h  rny  alone  who  took  uinbnige?  How  is  it  tliat  tlicrc  wt'ir 
so  many  of  t!u»  name  of  Ling,  and  so  tew  who  did  not  close 
their  eyes? 


Po  Yu  of  Cit  ing  w  as  greedy  and  perverse,  and  liis  desires  were 
inuny.  Tse  list  wislunl  to  rank  before  every  one  else.  Both,  of 
»"ourse,  could  not  get  on  ton;erlit>r.  Tse  I  hi  assaulted  f'o  Yu,  who 
took  to  flight.  Sse  Tai  Inl  liis  countryinon  against  him,  and  defeated 
him.    Po  Yu  died.4    Nine  years  later  [the  |»f'ople  of  OU»rf  took 

1  Liny  might  mean :  atiinittlcd,  alive,  a  spirit,  but  it  has  many  other 
significations  besides,  as :— intelligent,  ingenious,  clever,  which  might  well  be  used 
as  a  postliutnous  title. 

2  This  j^j  would  mean :  — the  completer,  tlie  perfect  one. 

5  Li 厲 is  in  fact  not  a  proper  honorary  epithet,  its  sense  being:— oppressive, 
rniel,  malirious.  ugly,  tcrnUlo. 

1  According  to  the  Tuo-chaan  in  ：>42  B.r. 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  about  the  Dead. 


209 


alarm  owing  to  Po  Yu.  They  said  that  Po  Yu  was  coming.  Conse- 
quently, they  all  ran  away,  not  knowing  where  to  go.  In  the  fol- 
lowing year,  some  people  saw  Po  Yu  in  their  dreams  walking  about 
i"  armour,  and  saying,  "  Oil  the  day  jM-tse,  I  will  slay  Sse  Tni,  and 
next  year  on  »'，  I  will  slay  Kung  Sun  Ttian." ―  Wlien  the  jin-tse 
day  arrived,  Sse  lai  died,  and  the  fright  of  the  citizens  still  in- 
creased. Afterwards,  wlicn  the  jen-yin  day  came,  Kuug  Sun  Tuwi 
<lit*tl  also,  and  the  citizens  felt  still  more  alarmed.  Tse  Cltan  1  pro- 
moted liis  descendant  to  soot  lie  him,  and  lie  kept  quiet  ever  since.] 
Po  Yu  appeared  in  dreams,  and  said,  "  On  the  jM-tse  day  I  will  slay 
Sse  Tai,  and  on  jhi-yin  I  will  kill  Kung  Sun  7，'""i."  When  the  j^n-tse 
day  came,  Sse  Tai  died,  and  when  the  jin-yin  day  arrived,  Kung  Sun 
Tuan  breathed  his  last.  [When  subsequently  Tse  Chan  betook  him- 
self to  C/iin,  Chiny  Tse  of  Chao  ([uestioned  him  saying,  "Could  Po  Yu 
still  become  a  ghost?" ― Tse  Cltan  rejoined,  "He  could.  When  man 
ih  born,  that  which  is  first  created,  is  called  animal  soul,  and,  wlieu 
the  animal  soul  lias  been  formed,  its  yang  becomes  tlie  mind.  In 
case  the  substance  and  the  elements  are  abundantly  used,  the  soul 
and  the  miud  grow  very  strong,  and  therefore  show  great  energy, 
until  they  become  spirits.  Even  the  soul  and  tlie  mind  of  an  or- 
dinary man,  or  an  ordinary  woman,  wlio  have  met  with  a  violent 
death,  can  attach  themselves  to  men,  as  evil  spirits,  and  fancy  Po 
y«,  a  descendant  of  a  former  sovereign  of  mine,  Duke  A/",2  the 
grandson  of  Tse  Liang,  and  tlie  sou  of  Tse  Erh,  who  was  governor 
of  a  small  territory,  the  third  of  liis  family  who  held  this  post! 
Although  Ch^hiy  is  not  a  rich  country,  and,  as  a  saying  of  Cfi^ng  is, 
a  small  and  unimportant  State,  yet  three  successive  generations  liave 
ruled  over  it.  The  stuff  Po  Yu  was  made  of  was  copious  and  rich, 
and  his  family  great  and  powerful.  Is  it  not  natural  that  having 
met  with  a  violent  death,  he  sbould  be  able  to  become  a  ghost?"]3 
Po  Yu  killed  both  Sse  Tai  and  Kung  Sun  Tuan,  and  did  not  miss 
the  appointed  time.  That  shows  that  lie  was  really  a  spirit.  When 
Tte  Clian  had  raised  his  descendant,  he  kept  quiet.  Tse  Clian  under- 
stood the  doings  of  ghosts,  and  therefore  knew  that  they  really 
existed.  Since  they  are  real,  and  not  an  illusion,  Tse  Clian  an- 
swered tlie  question  addressed  to  him  unhesitatingly.  Tse  Clian  wa« 
a  wise  man  who  understood  the  nature  of  things.    If  Po  Yu  after 

»  Ttt  Ch'an  is  the  style  of  the  celebrated  statesman  Kun  Sun  C/tiao  of  ChUng 
581-521  b.c. 

a  Duke  Mu  of  Cheng  62(>-604  b.c. 

s  Quotation  from  the  Tw-chuan,  Duke  CKno  7th  year  (534  b.c.)  (Le9gc  Vol.  V, 

I'u  II,  p.  (iiy). 

I.un-llnig.  14 


Digitized  by  Google 


210 


Lun-Hfng:  B.  Me«aphy»ical. 


death  possesaed  no  knowledge,  how  could  lie  kill  Sse  Tai  and  Kung 
Sun  Titan ？  And  if  he  could  not  become  a  gliost,  wliy  had  Ts^  Ch'"" 
not  tlie  slightest  doubt  about  it? 

My  answer  is,  as  follows.  The  man  wlio  lived  at  enmity  witli 
Po  Yu  was  7*r  I  hi.  He  attacked  /'o  Yu,  who  fled.  Sse  Tai  led  liis 
country  men  against  Vo  Yu,  and  dt'feated  liim.  Kung  Sun  T"""  merely 
followed  Sse  T"i、  but  did  not  settle  his  own  dispute.  His  wrong 
was  much  smaller.  Po  Yu  killed  »S、r  Tai,  but  did  not  wreak  his 
vengeance  upon  Tse  I  hi.  Since  Kung  Sun  Tuau  died  along  with  Sue 
Tai,  though  liis  guilt  was  not  worth  speaking  of,  the  soul  of  Vo  Yu 
wa«  not  conscious.  Taking  liis  revenge  as  a  ghost,  lie  did  not  make 
any  distinction  between  a  grave  and  a  small  oirence,  as  lie  ought 
to  have  done. 

Furtliormore,  Tse  Ch  an  asserted  that  lie  who  dies  a  violent 
death  can  become  a  ghost.  What  does  a  violent  death  mean ?  Does 
it  mean  that  according  to  fate  Po  Yu  ought  not  yet  to  have  died, 
when  lie  was  killed?  Or  does  it  mean  that  /*o  Yu  was  guileless,  but 
hardly  dealt  witli  ？  If  the  idea  is  that  lie  was  slain,  before  tlte  time  of 
liis  death  luid  arrived,  there  are  many  others  wlio  likewibf  died  be- 
fore their  appointed  time,  and  if  it  siguifi«'s  that  Vo  Yu  was  not  guilty, 
but  tlie  victim  of  att  outrage,  then  Vo  Yu  was  not  alone  outraged. 
If  murdered  men  can  become  ghosts,  Pi  Kan  and  Tse  I  hit  did  not. 

During  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn  "  period  thirty-six  sover- 
eigns in  all  were  assassinated.  Tlirirs  w  ere  violent  deaths  par  ex- 
cellence. Tlieir  sway  rxtendod  over  entire  States,  the  fine  substance 
of  which  they  weir  formed  must  liavo  been  very  abundant,  and 
they  aucceedtMl  one  another  as  lords  of  the  soil,  not  only  through 
three  generations.  Tlie  dignity  of  a  reigning  prince  is  not  011  a 
level  witli  that  of"  a  governor.  I'lieir  ancestors,  who  were  first 
fiifeofl'ed,  were  certainly  tlu*  equals  of  Tse  l/muy,  the  son  of  Duke 
Mu.  Since  the  sovereigns  of  JStates  w  ho  sufiered  death  at  the  haiuls 
of  their  treai'lierous  subjects,  were  of  tlio  ljiglicst  nobility,  their  souls 
a»  ghosts  would  liave  been  more  enli^hteru'd  than  Vo  V"，  wlio  iu 
taking  liis  w'nge  ami  killing  his  oneniies  went  so  far  as  to  tlestroy 
Sse  Tai  and  Kuntf  Suit  Twin.  The  thirl y-six  princes  did  not  become 
ghosts,  nor  did  tlirir  thirty-six  subjei:ts  t'oel  their  vengeance.  If  the 
spirit  of  Po  Yu  possess**'!  knowledge,  herause  he  was  a  reckless 
I'hararter,  the  world  lias  nt'ver  sren  more  desperate  men  tlian  Chuh 
and  Chou,  yi't,  when  Chieli  and  Chou  were  put  to  death,  their  souls 
did  not  become  "hosts. 

T、、e  Ch  mis  reasoning  is  a  posterioii.  Noticing  that  Po  Yu  met 
with  a  violent  death,  lu>  liekl  that  all  people  (lying  ait  unnatural 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  about  the  Dead. 


211 


death  can  become  ghosts.  Had  Po  Yu  become  a  ghost  without 
having  met  、vith  a  violent  death,  he  would  have  maintained  that 
all  people  can  become  ghosts,  unless  they  have  died  an  unnatural 
山、 atli.  What  difference  was  there  between  Tse  H.si  and  Po  Yu,  while 
both  were  liviug  in  Ch'eng?  W \\y  should  his  death  be  otherwise 
than  that  of  Po  Yu?  Both  were  killed  by  their  contr}'inen  for  their 
lawlessness.  Po  Yu  could  become  a  ghost,  and  Tse  Hsi  could  not. 
The  argument  on  the  violent  death  would  suit  in  the  case  of  Po  Yu, 
but  be  inadmissible  in  that  of  Tse  list.  The  story  of  Po  Yu  is  like 
the  tale  of  the  Earl  of  7m.  The  talu  of  the  Earl  of  T"  being  un- 
reliable, that  of  Po  Yu  cannot  be  regarded  as  true  either. 


[Duke  Huan  of  Ch  in  1  invaded  Chin,  and  encamped  himself  at 
Fu-shih.'1  The  Marquis  of  Chin  had  gathered  his  troops  iu  C'/"',s  to 
seize  the  land  of  the  7>',4  and  restore  tlie  Marquis  of  U.s  When 
he  came  back  from  this  expedition,  Wei  K  o  defeated  tlie  army  of 
C/i'in  at  Fu-sltiJi,  ami  made  Tu  Ilui  prisoner.  Tu  Ilui  was  the  strongest 
man  in  C/iin.  Previously  Wei  Wu  7:、v?rt  had  a  favourite  concubine, 
but  no  son  by  lier.  VV' hen  he  fell  sick,  he  bade  Wei  A'  o  to  give 
】iis  concubine  to  somebody  in  marriage.  Afterwards,  when  his  case 
became  more  serious,  he  ordered  Wei  K  o  again  to  bury  the  con- 
cubine with  liiin,  but,  when  Wei  Wu  Tse.s  death  ensued,  Wei  K'o  did 
not  bury  her.  Some  people  found  fault  witli  him,  but  Wri  A  o  re- 
plied, " During  his  delirium  the  mind  of  my  father  、vas  deranged, 
there  lore  I  followed  tlie  orders  he  gave,  wlien  hi*  was  in  his  senses." 
At  the  battle  of  Ftt-s/if/t,  Wei  h  o  perreived  an  uld  man  plaiting  grass 
with  a  view  to  ensnaring  Tu  Ilui,  wlio  stumbled,  and  fell  down,  and 
thus  was  caught.  In  the  night  lie  beheld  the  old  man  in  his  dreams, 
who  said  to  him,  "I  am  the  father  of  the  woman  which  you  have 
given  away.  You  have  obeyed  your  father's  orders  of  the  time, 
when  he  was  still  in  his  right  mind,  therefore  I  have  paid  you  my 
debt  of  gratitude."]7 

The  father  of  the  favourite  knew  tlie  virtue  of  Wfi  K'o,  tliero- 
lore  he  appeared  in  tlie  shape  of  a  ghost,  plaited  grass,  and  lielped 

»  603-575  b.c. 

s  Near  Hsi-an-fu  in  Sherui. 

3  In  tlie  Ping-ynng  prefecture  {Shatuti). 

*  Aboriginal,  non -Chinese  tribes. 

*  The  Ti  had  dethroned  him,  and  conquered  his  territory. 
c  VV>i  1(0'，  lather. 

: Qiiutaiiun  hum  tlie  T^-c/ma  i,  Duke  Hjttiun  1  .*>th  year  (、'•>:{  h.c). 


Digitized  by  Google 


212 


Lnn-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


him  to  win  the  battle.  This  clearly  proves  the  enlightenment  ami 
the  knowledge  of  the  spirit. 

I  say  that,  provided  that  the  father  of  the  woman  did  know 
the  virtue  of  Wei  A"  o,  aud  appeared  as  a  gliost  to  help  him  in 
battle,  he  should  have  been  able  to  reward  those  whom  lie  liked 
during  his  life-time,  and  to  destroy  whom  he  hated,  while  alive. 
Human  intercourse  is  amicable  or  otherwise.  Kindness  and  un- 
friendliuess  must  be  requited,  just  as  gratitude  was  to  be  shown 
for  the  sake  of  the  woman.  Now,  the  old  man  was  unable  to  re- 
quite the  kindness 】ie  had  received,  while  alive,  and  only  could  sliow 
his  gratitude  for  the  goodness  wliich  lie  received  after  death.  That 
is  no  proof  of  knowledge,  or  of  the  ability  to  become  a  ghost. 

When  Chang  LUtng  walked  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Sse,  au 
old  man  pri'seuted  Iiim  with  a  book.1  Kuung  Wu  Ti 2  was  sorely 
pressed  in  Ho-pei?  when  an  old  man  gave  Ins  advice.  One's  fate 
bt'iug  grand,  and  the  time  lucky,  one  must  meet  nitli  felicitous  and 
pleasant  auguries.  Wei  K  o  was  to  take  Tu  //'"•  prisoner,  and  to 
distinguish  himself  in  battle,  consequently  tlie  pliantom  of  an  old 
man  appeared  plaiting  grass,  where  the  hosts  were  passing. 


WaUg  Chi*  was  buriod  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Hun.  Tlie  Lumi 
river  having  undermined  his  tumulus,  the  front  part  of  his  coffin 
became  visible.  Writ  Wang  said,  14  How  pleasing!  Our  old  lor'l 
certainly  wishes  to  sec  his  officers  and  people  oiicp  more,  therefore 
he  caused  the  Luan  to  bring  his  coffin  to  light."  Upon  this,  he 
held  a  court,  and  all  the  people  could  view  liim  for  three  days. 
Then  he  had  him  buried  again. 一  Wen  Wong  was  a  sago,  who  knew 
tlie  true  nature  of  tilings  and  principles.  Seeing  that  Wang  Ch;， '、' 
coffin  was  visible,  lie  knew  that  his  spirit  was  desirous  of  seeing 
tlie  people,  therefore  he  took  him  out,  and  showed  him. 

I  fancy  that  all  tlie  kin^s  and  emperors  wlio  from  ancient 
times  were  entombed  in  the  earth  after  tlieir  deaths,  must  be  counted 
by  thousands.  They  did  not  desire  to  sec  their  people  again,  where- 
fore should  Wang  Chi  alone  have  done  so?  On  the  banks  of  tlie 
Yellow  Hirer  and  the  Sse,  many  tombs  have  been  built,  and  the  coffins 
wliich  by  an  inuudatiuu  and  a  land-slip  have  been  uncovered  are 

1  Cf.  p.  95. 

*  25-57  a.d. 

8  In  S/uxnsi. 

«  The  father  of  Wen  Wantf. 


igitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  about  the  Dead. 


213 


innumerable.  Did  all  those  persons  wish  to  see  their  people  again? 
The  undermining  of  the  foot  of  Mount  Am  by  the  Lwvt  is  like  the 
inundations  and  the  ruptures  caused  by  the  waters  of  the  Yellow 
River  and  the  Sse.  MV»  Wang  perceiving  the  front  part  of  the  coffin 
exposed,  commiserated  tlie  old  lord,  and  felt  sorry  for  him,  and 
imagined  that  he  wished  to  come  out  again.  Tliis  is  the  natural 
sentiment  of  a  devoted  and  filial  son,  and  a  natural  feeling  for  the 
other's  well-being.  As  the  wise  man  and  the  sage  he  was,  he  felt 
deeply  touched,  and  did  not  take  the  time  to  reason  and  analyse 
his  feelings.  He  treated  a  dead  man,  as>  though  lit*  were  living, 
and  therefore  ^ve 】iira  a  new  tomb.  The  masses  believe  in  the 
words  of  wise  men  and  sages,  hence  they  fancy  that  Wang  Chi  wished 
to  see  his  people. 

Duke  Ching  of  Ch  i 1  was  going  to  invade  Sung.  When  his 
troops  passed  Mount  T'ni,  the  duke  saw  two  old  gentlemen  in  his 
dream,  who  stood  tlicrc  in  a  lit  of  passion.  The  tluke  told  Yen  Tae^ 
who  replied,  "  They  are  T  any 3  and  Yi  Yin,*  former  worthies  of 
Sting." ― The  duke  was  incredulous,  and  thought  that  tlit'y  were  the 
spirits  of  Mount  T  ai.  Yen  Tse  said,  "  Your  Highness  disbelieves  me, 
allow  me  to  describe  the  appearance  of  T  nug  and  IV  Yin.  T'ang 
is  pale  and  tall,  aud  has  a  beard  on  the  chin,  which  is  pointed 
above,  and  full  below.  He  keeps  himself  straight,  and  talks  with 
a  loud  voice."— The  duke  said,  "  Yes,  so  he  is."  Yen  Tse  continued, 
" Yi  Yin  is  dark  and  short,  and  has  dishevel  led  hair  and  whiskers, 
which  are  full  above  and  pointed  below.  He  has  a  stooping  gait, 
and  talks  low."— The  duke  said,  "Yes,  so  ho  is,  but  what  is  to 
be  done  now?"— Tse  replied,  "  T'ang,  Tai  Chia,  Wu  Ting,  and 
Tsu  Yi&  were  excellent  rulers  of  the  empire.  It  is  not  right  that 
they  should  have  no  offspring  left.  Now  there  remains  only  Sung, 
which  Your  Highness  is  going  to  invade.6  Therefore  T'ang  and 
Yi  Yin  are  enraged,  and  ask  you  to  dismiss  your  army,  and  keep 
peace  with  Swtg" ― The  duke  did  not  take  heed,  and  invaded  Sutty 

1  54*5-488  b.c. 

， The  Great  Diviner  of  f  h'i  (cf.  p.  112)  and  reputed  author  of  the 】>n 
Tm  ch'«n~ch'iu, 

*  The  founder  of  the  Shang  dynasty,  1766-1753  b.c. 

*  'fane's  prime  minister. 

s  All  four  were  sovereigns  ol'  iho.  Shnng  dynasty.    T  ai  Chia  reigiied  from 
1753-1720,  Wu  Ting  1：!24-12<0,  and  lm  Yi  152；.  15TK5  B.r. 

*  The  dukes  ol'  Sunt/  derived  llieir  dt-scent  from  the  sovereigns  of  the 
Shang  dynasty. 

7  Quoted  from  Yen  7V\  ( 'h nti-cfi  in  ( l">ii-pin (；' yil-lnn)  with  some  variations. 


Digitized  by  Google 


214 


Lun  -Hrng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


after  all,  when  his  army  was  in  fact  beaten. ―  Tang  and  Yi  Yin  pos- 
sessed knowledge,  and  resented  the  attack  of  Duke  Citing  upon  Sung, 
therefore  they  appeared  to  him  in  his  dreams  enraged,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  checking  him,  but  Duke  Cking  did  not  stop,  and  his  army 
met  with  a  reverse. 

They  say  that  previously  Duke  Ching  had  already  seen  a  comet 
in  his  dreams.  At  the  time  in  question,  the  comet  did  not  appear, 
wliich  was  unlucky.  It  may  be  so,  but  all  tliis  were  dreams.  Duke 
Ching  saw  a  comet,  but  it  was  uot  a  real  comet,  and  he  dreamt  of 
T^ang  and  Yi  Yin,  but  they  were  not  real.  Perhaps  they  wew  in- 
auspicious visions  accompanying  the  defeat  of  his  army.  Yen  l\e 
believed  in  the  dream,  and  said  that  the  figures  were  tliose  of  T  ant/ 
and  Yi  Yin.  Duke  Chbig  aceppted  Yen  Tses  explauatiun  as  true.  Wlicn 
tlie  C'liin  united  the  empire,  they  destroyed  the  descendants  of  Yi 
Yin.  From  that  time  up  to  the  present  the  sacrifices  to  Tx any  and 
Yi  Yin  have,  been  discontinued,  why  did  they  not  resent  it? 


[Tse  Ch  an  of  Ch  4ng  1  was  sent  on  a  complimentary  mission  to 
Chin.  The  marquis  "f  Chin 2  was  sick,  llan  IhiUm  Tse9  went  to  meet 
the  guest,  and  privately  said  to  liiui,  "My  prince  is  laid  up  tliree 
months  already.  Although  we  all  have  run  about  to  sacrifice  to 
the.  hills  and  streams,  liis  sickness  increases  instead  ol'  improving. 
Now  he  has  dreamt  of  a  yellow  bear  passing  through  the  door 
of  his  bedchamber.  What  devil  can  that  be?" ― Tse  W an  replied, 
" Since  the  prince  is  so  enlightened,  and  your  administration  so  grand, 
why  should  there  be  a  malignant  spirit  ?  Of  yore  Yao  banislied  Kuu  4 
for  perpetuity  to  Mount  Yn.s  His  spirit  l)eoame  a  yellow  bear,  which 
entered  into  tlie  deep  holes  of  the  Yii.  It  eventually  became  an  ob- 
ject of  veneration  to  tlie  llsia^  and  tlie  Three  Dynasties7  sa (！ ritieed 
to  it.  The  marquis  of  Chin  is  an  allied  prince,8  lias  he  perhaps 
uot  sacrificed  to  it?"  Han  Hsilan  pertormed  the  sacrifice  of  tlio 
I hia,  and  the  marquis  of  Chin  felt  a  relief.]9    The  yellow  bear  was 

1  Vid.  p.  209. 

， His  name  was  P'ing  (556-530  b.c.). 

s  Prime  minister  of  Chin. 

*  The  father  of  the  Emperor  YU. 

*  South  of  1-chou  in  Shanhmp. 

6  The  Hna  dynasty. 

7  H«ia,  Shang、  and  Chou. 

*  Allied  to  the  reigning  house  of  Chou. 

" Quoted  from  the  Tso-chuan,  Duke  Ch'ao  7th  year  (534  b.c.)  Ltggt  Vol.  V, 
Pt.  II，  p.  617). 


zed  by  Google 


FaUo  Reports  about  the  Dead. 


215 


the  spirit  ol"  Kuv.  The  marquis  of  Chin  had  not  sacrificed  to  it, 
therefore  it  passetl  through  the  door  of  his  bedroom.  W hen  Chin 
knew  it,  and  performed  the  sacrifice,  the  disease  was  interrupted. 
Does  tliat  not  show  that  tlie  dead  are  conscious? 

That  Kun  was  lei't  to  die  on  Mount  Yil  every  one  knows,  but 
w herefrom  should  people  learn  that  his  spirit  became  a  yellow  bear, 
and  entered  the  depths  of  the  Yd?  If  it  was  like  Duke  Xiu  Ai  of 
Lit,  who  during  a  disease  was  transformed  into  a  tiger, 1  it  could 
havo  been  verified  at  the  time  of  death.  Now  Kun  died  far  away 
un  Mount  Yu,  nobody  was  with  him,  、vlicrt、  did  tlie  news  come  from 
tliPH?  Moreover,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  his  spirit  became  a 
bear,  which  implies  that  he  died.  That  after  dea^li  his  spirit  became 
a  yellow  bear,  men  Itud  no  means  to  ascertain. 

Pe<ij»le  call  a  dead  man  a  ghost.  A  ghost  is  like  a  living  man 
in  form,  and  does  not  look  otherwise  tlian  a  man,  and  yet  it  is  not 
thr  spirit  of  the  deceased.  How  much  less  a  bear,  wliieli  has  no 
human  form,  and  does  not  resemble  man!  If  really  the  spirit  of 
Kun  after  death  was  transformed  into  a  yellow  bear,  then  the  spirit 
of  a  (lead  bear  might  also  eventually  become  a  man.  How  could 
anybody  dreaming  of  it  know  but  that  it  、vas  tlie  spirit  of  a  dead 
animal?  Those  who  believe  that  the  bear  was  t.l"、  spirit  of  Kun 
will  also  imagine  that  the  gliosts  whicli  appear  arc  tl">  vital  force 
of  the  dead.  There  is  uo  proof  that  it  is  the  vital  I'orce  of  human 
beings,  and  we  cannot  own  that  a  yellow  bear  was  the  spirit 
of  Kun. 

Furthermore,  dreams  are  visions.  When  good  or  bad  lm，k  are 
impending,  the  miud  shapes  tliese  visions.  Tims  tlie  sight  of  a 
bear  will  also  admit  of  an  interpretation.-  Now,  in  case  that  the 
spirit  of  Kun  really  became  a  yellow  bear  after  death,  must  the 
yellow  bear  which  uppeaml  in  the  dream  at  all  events  have  been 
the  spirit  of  Kun ？  The  feudal  princes  wore  wont  to  sacrifice  to 
tlie  mountains  and  streams.  Should  the  man is  of  Chin  have  viewed 
mountains  and  streams  in  his  dreams,  would  it  not  have  been, 
l)ecause  lie  liad  offeml  sacrifice  to  them,  tliat  those  mountains  and 
streams  appeared  to  him?3 

When  people  are  sick,  tliey  often  see  their  deceased  ancestors 
arriving  and  standing  by  their  side :  are  we  again  to  suppose  that 
these  deceased  ancestors  show  thruiselves  for  the  purpose  of  asking 

1  Cf.  Chap.  XXVII. 

2  Like  other  dreams.  The  visions  have  mostly  a  symbolical  meaning,  and 
must  not  be  semblances  of  real  beings. 

3  I'liey  would  be  evoked  hy  liis  rcincuibrance,  but  not  be  real. 


216 


Lnn-Hrng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


for  food?  What  we  see  in  our  dreams  is,  moreover,  being  inter- 
preted as  having  some  other  meaniug,  and  is  not  real  anyliow.  How 
can  we  prove  that ？  When  in  a  dream  we  have  perceived  a  living 
man,  this  man,  seen  in  our  dream,  does  not  meet  us  on  the  following 
day.  Since  the  man  seen  in  the  dream,  does  not  meet  us,  we  kuow 
that  the  yellow  bear  of  Ku" 《li(i  not  pass  through  the  bedroom 
door,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  and,  since  it  did  not,  Kun  did  not  ask 
for  food  either.  Kun  not  having  asked  for  food,  the  disease  of  the 
marquis  of  Chin  was  not  a  misfortune  caused  by  his  neglect  of  the 
Ilsta  sacrifice,  and  since  it  was  not  a  calamity  brought  about  by 
the  non-observance  of  this  ceremony,  the  relief  of  the  marquis  of 
Chi"  was  not  a  Iiujky  event  caused  by  the  performance  of  the  sacri- 
fice. There  having  been  no  real  luck,  it  is  evident  that  there  was 
no  consciousness  on  tlie  part  of  Kun. 

This  is  like  the  case  of  Lin  An,  Prince  of  Huai-nan,1  who  died 
charged  with  high-treason,  and  is  nevertheless  commonly  reported 
to  have  ascended  to  heaven  as  an  immortal.2  Whether  Tse  Clian 
also  bad  heard  such  a  false  rumour,3  、ve  cannot  make  out  now. 
By  chance  the  force  of  the  sickness  of  the  marquis  of  Clan  was 
just  going  to  be  broken  of  itself,  when  Tse  Cltan  happened  to  ex- 
plain tlie  appearance  of  the  yellow  bear.  Tlius  the  statement  that 
the  yellow  bear  was  tlie  spirit  of  Kun  found  credence. 


The  Emperor  Kno  Htutng  7i4  intended  to  make  Ju  17,  Prince 
of  Chao,  his  successor,  because  Ijc  was  like  him.  The  Empress  Lfl 
Hou  was  furious,  and  afterwards  poisoned  the  prince  of  Chao.  When, 
later  on,  La  Hon  went  out,  slie  beheld  a  grey  dog.  which  bit  her 
under  her  left  arm.  She  tliouglit  it  strange,  and  by  divination 
found  out  that  it  had  been  Ju  Yi,  princo  of  C/uio,  who  had  haunted 
hor.  She  then  began  to  suffer  from  the  wound  under  hrr  arm, 
which  did  not  heal,  and  died.8  People  believe  that  the  spirit  of 
Ju  Yi  transformed  itself  into  a  grey  (U)g  to  take  his  revenge. 

I  say  that,  when  a  valiant  warrior  tight iug，  flushed  with  anger, 
succumbs,  8word  in  hand,  and  being  hurt,  sinks  to  the  ground,  and 


1  The  Taoist  philosopher  Httai  Nan  T»t. 

3  Vid.  chap.  XXVIII. 

3  With  regard  to  the  metamorphose  of  Kun. 

*  Han  Kao  Tm,  206  194  b.c. 

R  Cf.  chap.  XVIII. 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  about  tlie  Dead. 


217 


breathes  his  last,  he  sees  with  his  eyes  the  adversary,  who  has  hit 
him,  yet,  after  death,  liis  spirit  is  incapable  of  taking  its  vengeance. 
When  Ln  ffou  poisoned  Ju  Y';  she  did  not  step  forward  personally, 
but  had  instructed  some  one  to  administer  tlie  poison.  First  the 
prince  was  not  aware  of  liis  being  poisoned,  and  then  in  his  auger 
did  not  know,  who  the  murderer  was.  How  then  could  lie  become 
a  (lemon,  and  avenge  himself  upou  LU  Hou? 

If  the  dead  possessed  knowledge,  nobody  had  more  reason  to 
hate  Lit  Hou  than  tlie  Emperor  Kao  Tm.  He  loved  Ju  Yi,  wliom 
the  empress  killed.  Tlie  soul  of  Kao  'Isu  ought  to  have  l>eea  like 
a  peal  of  thunder  in  Itis  wratli,  and  not  liave  waited  one  day,  be- 
fore he  called  Lil  Hou  to  account.  Why  was  the  spirit  of  Kao  Tsu 
not  like  that  of  Ju  Yi，  and  why  did  lie  dislike  Ju  Yi  after  liis  death, 
and  acquiesce  in  the  murder  of  the  empress? 


Wlien  the  report  of  a  quarrel  which  the  prime  minister  T'ien 
FMy 1  Marquis  of  Wu-on^  had  liad  with  tlie  former  generalissimo 
Kuan  Fit  over  a  glass  of  wine  reached  tlie  emperor,  Kuan  Fu  was  im- 
prisoned. Tou  Yiug3  attempted  to  rescue  him,  but  could  not  save 
him,  and  the  conspquence  was  that  Kuan  Fu  brought  down  capital 
punishment  upon  himself,  and  tliat  Tou  Yhuj  liad  to  suiFer  death 
likewise.  Subsequently,  Tien  FSn  contracted  a  very  painful  disease, 
during  which  he  cried,  "  Yes,  yes,"  and  asked  the  by-standere  to 
look.  Tliey  beheld  Kuan  Fu  and  Ton  Ying  sitting  by  his  side.  T  im 
FM's  sickness  did  not  release,  until  he  died.4 

I  reply  that  he  was  not  the  only  man  who  killed  another. 
Other  murderers  have  not  seen  tlieir  victims,  when  tliey  fell  sick 
afterwards,  whereas  Tien  Fhi  beheld  tlie  two  men  whose  deaths 
he  liad  brouglit  about.  T  ien  Vht  alone  did  so,  because  lie  felt  tlieir 
anger,  and  in  his  delirium  had  liallucinations.  Or  maybe  lie  per- 
ceived some  other  ghost,  and  the  necTomanccr  having  heard  of  his 
former  dispute  witli  Kuan  Fu  and  Ton  Ying,  and  of  liis  wish  to 


1  Uncle  of  the  Emperor  Han  Wu  Tu 
3  District  in  Honan. 

， Commander-in-chief  under  tlie  Emperor  ('king  Ti,  156-140  b.c,  who  was 
supplanted  by  T'ien  Fen, 

*  We  learn  from  the  Ch'ien  Han-thu,  chap.  52，  p.  12，  Biography  of  Kiian  Fu, 
that  T'ien  Frn  felt  pain  all  over  the  body,  as  if  he  were  flogged,  and  cried  for 
mercy.  The  emperor  sent  his  visionist  to  look  at  him,  who  reported  that  the  ghosts 
of  Kuan  Fu  and  Tou  Yir^  were  holding  him,  and  boating  him  to  death. 


kJ  by  Google 


2IS 


T.uii-Hcut;:  B.  Met.ipliysical. 


learn  the  real  name  of  the  spirit,  and  seeing  h\m  crying,  "  Yes, 
yes,"  at  random,  gave  the  answor  that  Kunn  F"  and  Tan  Ying  wore 
sitting  near  him. 


The  governor  of  lluai-ynny, 1  Yin  Cft'i,  was  a  very  cniel  and 
oppressive  nia^istrat««.  Wlicu  he  liad  passt-d  away,  the  people  wliom 
lie  had  wron^od  intended  to  burn  his  l"、(ly,  hut  it  (lisa|»|)earc(l,  and 
revort«'d  to  its  grave.  He  was  conscious,  thorefore  the  people  were 
going  to  burn  him,  and  lie  was  a  spirit,  therefore  he  coulfl  disappear. 

I  presume  that  tlie  vanished  spirit  of  Yin  C/i'i  has  bis  analogies. 
During  the  Ch'in  opocli  three  mountains  disappeared.2  and  about 
the  end  of  the  Chou  dynasty  the  Nine  Tripods  were  ongulpliod.3 
Provided  that  things  wliich  ran  disappear  are  spirits,  then  the  throe 
mountains  and  the  Nine  Tripods  must  liave  bad  consciousness. 
Perluips  the  then  magistrate,  apprised  of  the  design  of  the  angry 
populace,  stealthily  removed  tl"'  corpse,  and  preteiulrd  that  it  had 
(Hsaj)ppare<l,  and  for  i'ear,  lest  tlie  outraged  people  should  v««nt 
tlu'ir  wratl)  upon  himself,  declare*!  that  it  lia<l  done  so  of  its  own 
accord.  All  persons  who  can  disappear  must  have  thrir  foot  to  walk 
ti|)on.  Now,  tl"'  circulation  of  tl"'  blood  of  the  (lt'c«'ast'(l  had  been 
interrupted,  and  liis  feet  could  irot  niovi-  any  more.  How  sliuuld 
lie  have  managed  his  (liglit? 

In  H'm,  Wit  Tse  llsil  was  cooked,4  and  in  linn,  /'  /no  Ydeh 5  was 
pickled.  Burning  and  |,"'kliiig  is  the  same  torture.  Wu  Tse  Hm 
and  I*' hxj  Yfh'/i  were  e<pially  bravt1.  They  could  not  escape  the 
cooking,  or  avoid  the  pickling,  nnd  Yin  Ch  i  alone  is  said  to  liave 
been  al)le  to  return  to  hin  tomb.  Tliat  is  an  untruth  and  an  un- 
rounded  assertion. 


Doomed rt  Woikj  M*nuj  removed  tlie  «*ui press  Fn  Ifott,  the  \vil\' 
of  tlie  (Mnperor  Yitmi  7V,7  from  Iut  tomb.  lie  (lesecratod  her  coffin, 
and  took  from  it  l)oxes  with  jewels  and  seals.    Afterwards  lie  con- 

1  The  present  ( 'h ''n-clion  in  Honan. 

a  Cf.  chap.  XX. 

3  Cf.  chap.  XL. 

*  Cf.  p.  140. 

'、 P'<ng  King  of  Li»ny,  was  executed  by  order  of  Han  h'au  I'm  in 

1%  b.c,  when  he  had  revolted  against  the  emperor.  All  his  relations  to  the  third 
degree  were  put  to  death  along  with  him.    Vid.  Shi-chi  chap.  S,  p.  33v. 

r'  An  epithet  often  given  to  Chin  Shih  Hitamj  Ti  and  Wang  Mang,  both  equally 

detested  by  the  literati. 

7  4^-32  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


False  Reports  about  the  Dead. 


210 


veyod  the  corpse  to  Ting-foo, 1  wlierc  he  had  it  buried  again  after 
tlic  fashion  of  coininon  people.  When  the  colTia  was  taken  out,  a 
stencli  rose  to  heavt'ii.  Tlio  governor  of  Lot/anr/  on  approaching  tlic 
coffin  smelled  it,  and  dropped  down  dead.  Wnng  Many  likewise  disin- 
terred tlie  empress  Ting  Hon,  wile  to  tin*  emperor  Kung  Wouy^  \a  Ting- 
t'no,  but  fire  issued  from  her  crypt,  and  burned  several  hundred  ofli- 
cials.  and  scholars  to  (loath.  The  re-intennent  was  (lone  in  a  low  style, 
and  the  dead  were  robbed  of  their  valuables.  Tlicsc  tu  o  insults  induced 
them  to  cause  the  stench,  ami  send  tlie  fire  to  destroy  the  offenders. 

I  say  that  the  stencli  rose  to  hejivcn,  because  many  eatable 
things  had  been  placed  into  tlio  grave.  It  is  not  passing  strange 
that  men  could  not  stand  the  meplietic  vapours,  when  the  smell 
of  the  putrid  matter  came  forth  in  abundance,  but  it  is  strange  that 
flames  should  have  (lashed  from  tlie  <"ypt.  At  all  events,  it  was 
not  tlie  spirit  of  the  empress  Tmy  Ihu,  for  tlie  following  reason. 
Must  he  who  breaks  op*'n，  and  despoils  "raves  not  be  much  more 
hated  than  1"、  who  merely  changes  tlie  tombs?  Yet,  during  a  year, 
of  scarcity,  those  who  dig  up  tombs  for  tlie  purpose  of  ajjnropriat- 
nig  the  garments  of  the  dead  must  be  counted  by  tliousands.  Pro- 
vided tli at  the  departed  know,  whon  others  strip  them  of  their 
clothes,  and  leave  their  boilies  naked,  tliey  cannot  liindei'  it  at  tiiat 
time,  and,  later  on,  liave  no  means  to  take  tlieir  revenge. 

But  these  are  pp<»plc  of  small  account,  not  worth  mentioning. 
Ch  in  S/u7i  Huang  Ti  was  buried  near  the  Li-shan.^  At  the  close  of 
Erh  S/iih  Ihtanff  Tis  reign 4  tlie  robbers  of  the  empire  dug  up  his 
grave,  and  he  could  not  send  forth  either  stench  or  fire,  nor  kill 
a  single  man!  He  had  been  the  Son  of  Heaven,  and  could  not 
become  a  spirit.  I  low  then  should  Fu  Hon  and  Ting  Hou,  two  women, 
have  been  able  to  do  miracles?  Tlioy  are  believed  to  have  become 
spirits,  but  not  in  tlie  same  way,  and  to  have  shown  tlieir  powers 
in  different  places.  People  saw  flames,  and  smellod  had  odour. 
Consequently  the  assertion  tliat  both  became  spirits  is  erroneous. 


1  In  Ts'ao-ehou-/u  (Shanhmff). 

*  946-934  b.c. 

*  Near  Hsi-an-fu,  wliere  the  tumulus  of  the  mighty  emperor  is  still  visible. 
4  209-206  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


220 


Luii-Heng:  R.  Mctapliv^ical. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 
Spook  Stories  {Chi-yao). 

Duke  Ling  of  Wei1  was  proceeding  to  Chin.  When  he  had 
arrived  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Pu，'2  he  heard  at  night-time  a 
new  tuue  played  on  the  guitar,  which  pleased  him  so  well,  that 
he  ordered  somebody  to  ask  his  attendants  about  it.  They  all 
reported  that  they  had  heard  nothing.  Then  lie  called  for  the 
music-master  67* flan,  and  told  him  saying,  "  There  was  some  one 
playing  a  new  melody,  I  gave  orders  to  ask  my  followers  about 
it,  but  they  all  stated  that  they  bad  not  heard  anything.  It  is, 
as  if  a  ghost  made  the  music  for  me.  Pray,  listen  to  it  and  write 
it  down  lor  me."  The  music-ua aster  Chiian  acquiesced,  sat  quietly 
down,  played  the  guitar,  and  wrote  clown  the  tune.  On  the  following 
morning  lie  reported  that  he  had  got  it,  but  still  required  some 
practice.  He  therefore  asked  for  one  niglit  more  to  practise.  Duke 
Ling  granted  this  request.  Chiian  practised  one  more  night,  and 
ou  the  next  morning  lie  bad  mastered  it.  They  then  went  on 
to  Chin. 

Duke  I'  iiuj  of  Chin3  feasted  him  on  the  Shi  Yi  terrace.4  When 
they  were  flushed  with  wine,  Duke  Ling  rose  and  said,  "  I  have 
a  new  tunc,  whii-.li  I  would  like  to  have  played  for  Your  Highness 
to  hear."  The  duke  consented,  and  lie  called  upon  the  musio 
master  Chiian  to  sit  dowu  next  to  the  music-master  K  uangy  to 
take  the  lute,  and  strike  it,  but,  ere  Chiian  had  finished,  A." uang 
grasped  the  instrument,  and  stopped  him  saying,  "  This  is  a  song 


' 533^4«»9  n.r. 

2  On  the  border  of  the  provinces  (  hili  and  Shantung. 

3  f>">6  530  d.c. 

♦ 施^^  Tlie  chap.  24,  p.  3'.' v.  calls  it  the  "  Sh"""  terrace," 施 

wl,i<l1         sitiialeil  on        F'Vi  river  in  Shanxi. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


221 


of  a  doomed  State.  You  must  not  proceed."  Duke  P'ing  inquired, 
" Where  does  it  come  from?" ― The  music-master  K\tang  replied, 
" It  is  a  licentious  melody  composed  by  the  music-master  who 
made  this  voluptuous  music  for  Chou.  Wu  Wang  executed  Chou, 
hanging  his  head  on  a  white  banner.1  Yen  fled  to  the  east,  and, 
when  he  had  readied  tl»e  river  f、u,  he  drowned  himself.  Therefore 
to  hear  this  tune  one  must  be  on  the  banks  of  the  Pu.  If  form- 
erly any  one  heard  it,  his  State  was  wiped  out.  It  must  not  be 
continued." ― Duke  P'ing  said,  "  I  am  very  partial  to  music.  Let 
him  go  on."    ChUan  then  finished  his  tuue. 

Duke  P^ing  said,  "  What  do  tliey  call  this  air?  "—  The  music- 
master  replied,  44  It  is  what  tliey  call  G  major."  2  "Is  not  G  major 
most  plaintive? asked  the  duke. ― "It  does  not  come  up  to  C 
major,"  replied  K  uang. 一 "  Could  I  not  hear  (】 major?  ，，，  inquired  the 
duke. 一 The  music^master  rejoined,  "  You  cannot.  Of  old,  only 
princes  possessed  of  virtue  and  justice  were  allowed  to  hear  C 
major.  Now  the  virtue  of  Your  Highness  is  small.  You  could 
not  stand  the  hearing  of  it." ― The  duke  retorted,  "  I  am  very 
partial  to  music,  and  I  would  like  to  bear  it."  K  ttang  could  not 
help  taking  up  the  lute  and  thrumming  it.  When  he  played  the 
first  part,  two  times  eight  black  cranes  came  from  the  south,  and 
alighted  on  the  top  of  the  exterior  gate.  When  he  played  again, 
tliey  formed  themselves  into  rows,  and,  when  he  played  the  third 
part,  they  began  crowing,  stretching  their  necks  and  dancing,  flap- 
ping their  wings.  The  notes  F  and  G  were  struck  with  the  greatest 
precision,  and  their  sound  rose  to  heaven.  Duke  P  ing  was  en- 
raptured, and  all  the  guests  were  enchauted.  The  duke  lifted  the 
goblet,  and  rose  to  drink  the  health  of  the  music-master  h  'mng. 
Then  he  sat  down  again,  and  asked,  "Is  there  no  more  plaintive 
music  than  that  in  C  major? " 

K'uang  replied,  "  It  falls  short  of  A  major." ― "  Could  1  not 
hear  it?  ",  said  the  duke.— The  music-master  replied,  "  You  cannot. 
Of  yore,  Huang  Ti  assembled  tbc  ghosts  and  spirits  on  the  Western 
Mount  T'ai.z    He  rode  in  an  ivory  carriage,  to  which  were  yoked 

' Cf.  Shi-chi  chap.  4,  p.  11  and  Cl.ap.  XXXVIII. 

， I  am  not  quite  ccrtaiit,  whether  G,  (\  and  ^4  major  are  a  correct  rendering 
of  Chinese  ch'ing  (clear)  shanff,  chih  and  chio  7々 的 。 《敛。 .  "、e  M ,lmoirf， 
concernant  te«  CIiinoi«  Vol.  VI,  p.  115  these  notes  are  identified  with  tol,  ut,  and  la. 
At  any  rate  ch'ing  (clear) 淸 and  its  correlate  cho  (obscure)  would  be  ap- 
propriate terms  to  designate  sharp  aud  llat  notes.— The  parallel  passage  of  tJic  Shi-chi 
omits  to  specify  the  airs,  as  is  done  here. 

3  The  sacred  Mount  T'ai  is  in        East,  in  Shantung,  not  in  the  West. 


222 


Lun-HAng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


six  black  dragons.  Tlie  Pi-fang  bird  1  came  along  with  it,  and  Ch  ih 
Yu'  was  in  front.  The  Spirit  of  the  Wind  came  forward  sweeping 
the  ground,  and  tlie  Spirit  of  Rain  moistened  the  road.  Tigers  and 
wolves  were  in  front,  and  ghosts  and  spirits  in  the  rear,  reptiles 
and  snakes  crawling  on  the  ground,  and  white  clouds  covering  the 
empyrean.  A  great  assembly  of  gltosts  and  spirits!  And  then  he 
began  to  play  in  A  major.3  Your  virtue,  Sire,  is  small  and  would 
not  suffice  to  hear  it.  If  you  did,  I  am  afraid,  it  would  be  your  ruin." 

Duke  P  ing  rc  joiued,  "  I  am  an  old  man  and  vory  fond  of 
music.  I  would  like  to  hear  it." 一 The  musiomaster  K'uang  could 
not  but  play  it.  When  he  had  struck  the  first  notes,  clouds  rose 
from  the  uorth-we.st,  and  when  lie  played  a^ain,  a  storm  broke 
loose,  followed  by  torrents  of  rain.  The  tents  were  rent  to  pieces, 
the  plates  and  dishes  smashed,  and  the  tiles  of  the  verandah  liurled 
dowu.  The  guests  fled  iu  all  directions,  aud  Duke  P  ing  was  so 
frigbtoucd,  that  lie  fell  down  under  the  porches.  The  Chin  State 
was  then  visited  with  a  drought.  For  three  years  tlie  soil  was 
scorched  up.  The  duke's  body  began  to  suffer  pain  aud  to  lauguish 
therearter.4 

What  does  that  mean?  Since  the  State  of  Duke  Ling  of  Wei 
whs  not  going  to  ruin,  whereas  Duke  P  hiff  of  Chin  fell  sick,  and 
his  State  suffered  from  a  drought,  it  was  not  spook.  The  inusic- 
iii aster  Kr winy  had  said  that  tlie  States  of  those  who  Itad  heard 
this  turn'  before,  were  destroyed.  Now  the  two  States  liad  botli 
heard  it  before. 

Ho、v  <lo  \vt»  know  tliat  tho  new  tune  was  not  played  by  tlie 
niusic-nia>ster  Wlioa  Yen  liad  j umped  into  the  P«,  his  body 

decomposed  in  tlie  water,  ； m(l  his  vital  essence  dissolved  in  the 
mud.  Mow  could  he  still  touch  tlie  lute?  C/tii  Yuan  flung  himself 
into  the  river.  He  \\  as  as  able  a  writer  as  Yen  was  a  player  of 
lilt'  guitar.    If  Yen  could  strike  the  lute  again,  then  Cli  it  Yuan  would 

1  Some  say  that  it  is  the  spirit  of  wood.  It  is  described  as  a  bird  with  one 
wing,  always  (tarrying  fire  i"  its  mouth,  and  |iortendiiig  fire  in  tlie  house  where  it 
appears.  According  to  ilio  Shan-/uii-k-inff  it  would  be  a  bird  like  a  crane,  but  with 
one  leg,  n  green  i»lumage  adorned  with  red,  and  a  white  beak. 

2  A  legendary  person  said  by  sonic  to  liave  been  a  minister  of  Huang  Ti. 
Cf.  Chap.  XXXV. 

s  All  the  details  about  the  assembly  of  gliosts  arc  omitted  in  the  Shi-chi. 

*  Tlie  same  story,  illustrative  of  the  magical  force  of  music,  is  told  in  a 
parallel  passage  of  tlie  S/ii-c/il,  chap.  '2 1,  on  imisic,  p.  3(.>  seq.  Since  the  text  of  the 
Ltm-hetit/  \s  fuller,  1  presume  tliat  Wan;/  (  h  imp  did  not  (juotc  the  Shi-chi,  but  had 
an  olcier  source,  probably  the  Mann-.  Iroiii  wdicli  rlie  .Shi-c/u  has  ropied. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Storie: 


223 


have  been  able  to  write  again.  When  Yany  Tse  Ynn  lamented  Ch  i) 
Yitan's  death,  wherefore  did  lie  not  show  his  gratitude?  While 
alive,  Ch  il  Yuan  was  a  very  active  writer,  but  lie  could  not  thank 
Yang  Tse  Yi'm,  because,  wlion  dead,  lie  became  mud  and  i*arth.  His 
hand  being  rotten,  he  <'ould  not  use  it  again  to  write.  Since  C/iu 
Yuan  could  uot  use  his  rotten  liauil  to  write,  Yen  could  not  thrum 
the  guitar  with  his  tainted  thumb  either. 

Wlien  Confucius  was  buried  opposite  to  the  S-se  river,  the.  <SW 
flowed  backwards.  They  say  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  Confucius  which 
caused  the  Sse  to  flow  backwards.  Confucius  was  very  fond  of 
teaching,  just  as  Yen  liked  to  play  the  lute.  Provided  that  the 
music- is  aster  Yen  could  strike  the  lute  on  the  banks  of  the  Pu, 
why  could  not  Confuciits  teach  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Ssn? 


Viscouut  Chi  en  of  Cl",o、  was  sick,  and  for  five  days  did  not 
know  anybody.  His  higli  o Hirers  were  alarmed,  aud  then  called 
Pien  Cfiio.2  He  entered,  inquired  into  the  nature  of  the  malady, 
and  then  went  out  again.  Tuny  An  Yfi 3  asked  him,  and  Pien  Ch  io 
replied,  "  His  blood  circulation  is  all  right,  but  it  is  strange.  Form- 
erly Duke  Mu  of  Ch'inA  has  been  in  such  a  state.  After  seven 
days  lie  awoke,  aad,  when  he  had  recovered  consciousness,  lie  spoke 
to  Kung  Sun  (,'/〃•/'  and  Tse  Yii 5  saying,  '1  have  been  in  God's 
abode.  1  was  very  liappy,  and  1  stayed  away  so  long,  because  I 
was  lucky  enough  to  acquire  some  knowledge.  CJod  told  me  that 
the  Chin  State  would  be  iu  convulsions  for  f i ve  generations  and 
have  no  repose,  and  that  the  next  powerful  pi'ii":e  would  die,  be- 
fore he  was  old.  Owing  to  the  sou  of  this  monarch  no  distinction 
between  men  and  women  would  l)e  made  in  my  couotry.'  Kung  S"" 
C/tih  wrote  it  all  down,  ami  kept  the  paper  iu  a  trunk.  Then 
ensued  the  revolution  under  Duke  Jlsien  of  Chin^  the  doiniiiatton 
of  Doke  HV/i,7  the  victory  of  Duke  Ihiauy 8  over  the  army  of  ('/t  in 


1  516-457  B.c. 

2  Pien  Chio  is  the  honorary  appellative  of  ( It  in  Ywh  Jen,  a  celebrated  phys- 
ician who  travelled  from  State  to  State. 

3  A  minister  of  Viscount  ( 'hien. 

*  <i58  620  b.c. 

*  Officers  of  Ch'in. 

*  675-651  b.c. 
7  634-627  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


224 


Lun-Hcng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


at  Yao and  liis  weakness  towards  his  woman-folk  on  his  march 
lioine.2  The  sick u ess  of  your  prince  is  identical  with  this.  Within 
three  days  it  will  cease,  and  then  tlie  patient  will  liave  somt'thing 
to  say." 

Wlien  two  days  and  a  half  had  elapsed,  Viscount  C  It  ten  be- 
came conscious  again,  and  said  to  】iis  high  officers,  "  I  have  been 
with  God,  and  was  very  lia]>py.  With  the  spirits  I  roamed  about 
lieaven,  and  enjoyed  the  highest  bliss.  The  music  and  the  dances 
tliere  were  different  iroin  the  music  of  the  three  dynasties,  ami 
the  sound  went  to  heart.  Tliere  was  a  brown  bear  preparing  to 
seize  me.  God  bade  me  shoot  it;  I  hit  the  animal,  and  it  died. 
Tlien  a  spotted  bear  attacked  me;  I  hit  it  also,  and  it  died.  God 
was  very  mucli  ])leascil,  and  presented  me  with  two  caskets  of  the 
same  contents.  I  then  beheld  a  lad  by  God's  side.  God  entrusted 
to  me  a  7es  (log  and  ^aid,  '  Wlien  your  son  has  grown  up,  give 
it  to  him.'  God  told  mt'  further,  k  The  Chin  State  is  going  to  be 
dostroyod;  after  ten  generations4  it  will  have  disappeared.  Some 
one  of  tlie  family  ！ lame  of  Yingh  will  inllict  a  crushing  defeat  on 
the  people  of  d'houn  west  of  Fan-kuei,  but  he  will  not  keep  the 
country  all  the  snme.  Now  I  think  of  the  merits  of  Shun,  there- 
fore 1  will  marry  his  descendant  M^ng  Yao  to  your  grandson  of 
the  tenth  generation.' 7 

Tung  An  Yii  committed  all  these  words  to  writing  and  kept 
the  document.    He  inlbniKid  \riscount  Chien  oi.  、vhat  Pien  C/i'io  had 

1  A  defile  in  Hotian. 

2  On  the  battle  of  Yao  wliich  took  place  in  62G  h.c.  cf.  Tso-chuan  Duke  list, 
o'id  year.  The  weakness  of  Duke  Hfiiung  consisted  in  releasing  his  prisoners  at 
the  request  of  his  mother,  a  princes^  of  Chin,  which  was  deeply  resented  by  his 
oflkere.    V".  Cliap.  XL. 

3  Northern  barbarians.  A  Ti  dog  was  probably  a  huge  Mongolian  dog, 
resembling  a  St.  Bernard,  mucli  liigger  tlian  tlie  common  Cliinese  dog. 

1  We  ouglit  to  read  **  seven  generations  "  as  tlie  ^hi-clu  does.  The  characters 
for  seven  and  ten  can  bo  easily  confomided.  (  h"'n ，&  sickness  took  place  in  500  b.c. 
under  the  reign  of  Duke  Tiny  of  Chin,  From  Duke  Ting  to  the  end  of  the  Chin 
State,  which  in  Vub  broke  up  into  the  three  manjuisates  of  HV/,  Chao,  and  Han, 
there  arc  only  seven  rulers,  Ting  included.  Viscount  Chien  was  a  vassal  of  Duke 
Tinff  and  ancestor  of  the  later  manjuises  and  kings  of  (:hao. 

%   Yirtff  wa.s  the  t'ainily  name  of  the  viscounts  of  Cfuw. 

fl  Thin  does  not  mean  the  people  of  tl»e  royal  domain  of  Chou9  but  the  people 
of  Wei  (H^nan),  whose  princes  were  descended  from  a  side  branch  of  the  royal 
hou>e,  their  ancestor  being  A  rci/'〃  -、 7"',  a  younger  brother  uf  the  Kmperor  Wu  Wang. 
After  the  extinction  of  (■/"/,,  the  Marquis*  L%'ng  of  i-liao  conquered  seventy-three 
towns  from  Wei, 

7  It  should  be  "  of  the  seventh  generation,"  for  King  Wu  Ling,  who  wa« 
married  to  M niy 】〃'—'，  was  a  dcsc^iidunt  oi'  Viscount  (  hien  in  the  seventh  degree. 


igitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


said.  Ckien  Tse  then  made  Pien  Ch'io  a  grant  of  forty  thousand 
raou  of  land. 

When,  one  day,  Viscount  C/iien  went  out,  a  man  stood  in 
his  way.  Though  warned  off,  he  did  not  go.  The  retinue  were 
going  to  arrest  liim,  when  the  man  on  the  road  said,  "  I  wish  to 
liave  an  audience  with  His  Lordship."  The  attendants  informed 
C/iien  Tse,  who  called  the  man  crying,  "How  delightful ！  I  saw 
you  in  my  rambles." ― "  Send  your  attendants  away,"  said  the  man 
on  the  road,  "  I  would  like  to  speak  to  you."  When  Ckien  Tse 
had  dismissed  bis  men,  the  man  on  the  road  continued,  "  Some 
time  ago,  when  Your  Lordship  was  sick,  I  was  standing  by  God." 一 
" That  is  true,"  said  Viscount  C/iien,  "  What  did  I  do,  when  you 
saw  me?  ，' 一 "  God  bade  Your  Lordship,"  replied  the  man  on  the 
road,  "  to  shoot  tlic  brown  and  the  spotted  bears,  which  both  were 
killed." ― "What  does  that  mean,"  asked  Chien  Tse. 一 "The  Chin 
State,"  replied  the  man,  "  will  be  in  extremities,  and  Your  Lord- 
ship will  take  the  lead.  God  ordered  you  to  destroy  the  two 
ministers,  for  the  brown  and  the  spotted  bears  were  their  fore- 
fathers."― " What  does  it  mean,"  inquired  tlie  Viscount,  "  that  God 
gave  me  two  caskets  both  having  the  same  contents?  "-  -The  man 
on  the  road  said,  44  Your  Lordship's  son  will  conquer  two  kingdoms 
in  the  Ti  country,  which  will  be  named  after  him." 1 一 "  I  perceived 
a  lad  near  God,  said  Chien  Tse,  and  God  entrusted  to  me  a  Ti 
dog  saying,  4  When  your  son  has  grown  up,  give  it  to  him..  Would 
my  son  be  pleased  to  have  such  a  clog?  " ― 14  That  lad,  rejoined 
the  man,  "is  your  son,  aud  tlie  7»  dog  is  the  ancestor  of  Ted. 
Your  Lord  si  lip's  son  will  get  possession  of  Tai.  Among  your 
d<*sccin1aiit8  there  will  be  a  change  of  government,  they  will 
wear  Mongoliau  dress,  and  two  States  will  be  added  to  that  of 
the  Ti: 

Chien  Tse  asked  the  man's  name  and  proposed  to  employ  hi  in 
in  an  official  capacity,  but  the  man  on  tlie  road  declined  saying, 
"I  am  but  a  rustic  and  have  delivered  God's  message."  Then  he 
disappeared.2 

What  does  this  mean ？  It  was  all  spook,  they  say.  The  ex- 
planation of  the  things  seen  in  God's  presence,  as  given  by  the 
man  on  the  road  was  the  correct  interpretation,  and  the  man  on 
the  road  himself  an  apparition. 


»  Tai  and  CMh. 

、 So  far  the  story  lias  been  quoted  lroni  the  Shi-chi,  chap.  43,  p.  7  seq. 
I.un-il^.  16 

Digitized  by  Google 


226 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Mctaphysiral. 


Later  on,  tlie  tw  o  ministers  of  Chin,  Fan  Win  Tse  and  Chung 
Hang  Chao  Tse  mutinied.  Viscount  Cfiien  attacked  and  routed  them, 
and  both  fled  to  67/ /. 

At  that  time  Chi^n  Tse  had  】iis  sons  examined  physiognomic- 
ally  by  Ku  I'u  Tse  Ch'ing. 1  None  of  them  had  any  auspicious 
signs,  but,  when  the  physiognomist  arrived  at  Wu  Hsil,  his  son 
by  his  Ti  wife,  he  declared  him  to  be  noble.  Chim  Tse  conversed 
with  him,  and  discovered  that  he  was  very  intelligent.  Chien  Tse 
then  called  all  his  sons  and  said  to  them,  "  I  liave  hidden  a  pre- 
cious charm  on  Mount  Ck atig?  He  、vho  first  finds  it,  will  be 
rewarded."  All  the  sons  ascended  the  mountain,  but  did  not  find 
any  tiling.  W  hen  Wu  Hail  returned,  lie  said  that  he  had  found  tlie 
harm.  Viscount  C/iien  asked,  how.  "On  Mount  C/i  nng"  replied 
Wu  Hsii,  "one  is  near  7>/i,3  which  might  be  acquired." ― Chien  Tse 
thought  liim  to  be  very  clever,  therefore  he  deposed  the  heir-ap- 
parent, and  j)ut  Wu  llsil  in  iiis  place.  When  Chien  Tse  died,  Wu 
Hsil  became  his  successor  under  the  name  of  Viscount  Hsumg. 4 

After  Viscount  Hsimig  had  oome  to  power,  he  instigated  some- 
body to  assassinate  tlie  king  of  Tai、  and  annexed  his  territory,  and 
likewise  lie  seized  the  R'ri'itory  of  tlie  CI  ah  family.5  Later  on,  lie 
married  a  Juikj  from  K'uug-t'ung^  Ton  generations  after  Chien  Tse' 
came  Kiug  Wu  Ling.9  Wu  Ching9  introduced  to  liim  liis  mother  of 
the  tiainr  of  Ying  and  his  daughter  Meng  Yao. 10  Subsequently  King 
yVu  Liny  seized  Chung  shun  1 1  and  annexed  the  Hu  territory.12  In  his 
nineteenth  year  King  Wu  Ling  assumed  tlie  Hu  dress,  and  his  sub- 
jects adopted  the  Hu  customs.    Kverything  happened  as  predicted, 


1  Comp.  p.  307. 

' Another  name  for  Mount  Ufng  in  T a-tung-fu  in  North  S/tansi. 
" A  Ti  State  occupying  the  confines  of  North  Sha'wi  and  Motujolia. 
*  Cf.  Shi-chi,  chap.  43,  p.  llv. 
6  An  eurldom  in  the  south  of  tlie  Chin  State. 

6  Name  of  a  mountain  in  Kamu  and  of  an  aboriginal  tribe  (Jung)  settled  there. 

7  It  must  be    seven  generations." 

»  V\  «  Ling'n  reigii  lasted  from  325-29"  B.r. 

9  In  the  Shi-chi,  chap.  43,  p.  19.     Wu  Ching  in  called  Wu  Kuang.    He  was  a 
descendant  of  Shun. 

10  The  passage  seems  to  be  corrupt.  The  Shi-chi  says  "  Wm  Kuang  through 
his  wife  introduced  (to  the  king)  his  beautiful  daughter  }  mg  Mrng  】'"。•"  First  a 
palace  girl,  M-'ng  Yao,  some  years  later,  wa.s  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  4ucen.  See  on 
this  passage  Ch<ivunne>\.  Mi  ni.  //"/.  Vol.  V,  p.  68  Note  7. 

11  Originally  a  part  of  Chin,  in  the  modern  Ting-chou  of  Chili  province. 

11  These  Ha  tribes  were  settled  in  the  northern  provinces  ： 一 ( 'fuk,  Shau.ti, 
S/mui,  and  Kantu. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


227 


and  nothing  was  wrong.  The  supernatural  lucky  signs  manifested 
by  portents  all  proved  true;  so  they  say. 

All  these  things  are  not  true.  The  lucky  and  unlucky  omens 
happening  one  after  the  other  were  like  manifestations  of  Heaven, 
but  how  do  we  know  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Heaven  (lid  not 
send  any  message?  Because  the  man  on  the  road  was  by  God's 
side,  for  only  spirits  of  the  higliest  degree  can  keep  near  tlie  Ruler 
of  Heaven.  Those  who  forward  God's  commands  are  the  heavenly 
envoys.  The  envoys  of  liumnn  princes  are  provided  with  horses 
and  carriages,  and  it  would  not  be  dignified  for  an  envoy  of  the 
Ruler  of  Heaven  to  stand  alone  on  the  roail.  Of  heavenly  officials 
there  are  one  hundred  aad  twenty, 1  wlio  do  nut  differ  from  those 
of  the  kings  of  tlie  earth.  The  kings  of  the  earth  have  plenty  of 
officials  and  attendants,  who  have  received  llieir  power  after  tlie 
model  of  the  heavenly  officials.  Since  the  officials  of  Heaven  and 
Earth  are  alike,  their  envoys  must  resembl*'  each  other  also,  and, 
tliere  being  such  a  similarity,  it  is  impossible  that  one  man  should 
have  been  so  dissimilar. 

How  do  we  know  that  God,  whom  Chien  Tse  saw,  was  not 
the  real  God?  We  know  it  from  tlie  interpretation  of  dreams. 
Towers,  belvederes,  hills,  and  mountains  are  images  for  an  official 
post.  When  a  man  dreams  of  ascending  a  tower  or  a  belvedere, 
or  of  mounting  a  liill  or  a  mountain,  lie  will  get  an  office.  In 
reality  a  tower,  a  belvedere,  a  liill,  or  a  mountain  are  not  an  of- 
ficial post.  Hence  we  know  that  God,  wliom  Viscount  Chien  saw 
in  his  dream,  was  not  the  Ruler  of  Heaven.  When  an  official 
dreams  of  a  prince,  this  prince  does  not  appear  at  all,  nor  does 
he  give  presente  to  the  official.  Therefore  the  interpretation  of 
dreams  teaches  us  that  Gi》(l  who  gave  Chien  Tse  two  caskets  and 
a  Ti  dog,  was  not  the  Supreme  Ruler.  Since  it  was  not  the  Ruler 
of  Heaven,  the  heaven  over  which  Chien  Tse  roamed  with  the  other 
ghosts,  as  lie  says,  was  not  heaven. 

Shu  Sun  Mu  Tse  of 丄" 2  dreamed  that  heaven  fell  down  upon 
him.3  If  this  had  really  been  tlie  case,  heaven  would  have  drop- 
ped upon  tlie  cartli,  and  approadiing  tla*  earth,  it  would  not  have 
reached  S/m  Sun  Mu  Tse  owing  to  the  resistance  o fit* rod  by  towers 
and  terraces.  Had  it  readied  hiui,  then  towers  and  terraces  ought 
to  have  been  demolished  first.    Towers  and  terraces  were  not  de- 

1  The  stars,  considered  as  the  officials  of  God,  the  Ruler  of  Heaven,  and  as 
divinities. 

1  A  nohlcman  of  the  Iai  State  of  the  Gth  cent.  n.c. 

Tliiw  diuuni  i.s  nurrated  in  the  Tm-chuan.  Duk^  ('h'ao  4tli  year  (537  u.c). 


Digitized  by  Google 


228 


Lnn-Heng:  B.  Metajiliysical. 


molished,  therefore  heaveu  did  not  descend  upon  the  eartli.  Since 
it  did  not  descend  upon  the  earth,  it  could  not  reach  him,  and, 
since  it  did  not  reacli  】iim,  that  which  fell  down  upon  liim  was 
not  heaven,  but  an  effigy  of  lieaven.  As  tlie  lieavcn  wliich  fell 
do、vn  upon  S/m  SttnMu  T.se  in  his  dream  was  not  the  real  heaven,  so  tlie 
heaven  through  which  Chien  Tse  had  been  roving  was  not  heaven. 

Somn  one  might  object  that  、ve  also  have  direct  dreams,  in- 
somuch as  、vc  dream  of  so-and-so,  and  on  the  next  day  sec  lum 
or,  as  we  dream  of  a  gentleman,  whom  we  see  on  the  following 
day.  I  admit  that  we  can  have  direct  dreams,  but  these  direct 
dreams  are  scmljlances,  and  only  these  semblances  are  direct,  which 
will  become  evident  from  tlio  following  fact.  Having  a  direct  dream, 
we  dream  of  so-and-so,  or  o!"  any  gentleman,  and,  on  tlie  following 
day,  see  Mr.  So-and-so,  or  tlie  gontlrman  iu  question.  Tliat  is  direct. 
But,  when  、、'<»  ask  so-and-so  or  that  gentleman,  they  will  reply 
tliat  tliey  have  not  appeared  to  us  in  our  dreams.  Since  tliey  did 
not  appear,  the  persons  we  saw  in  our  dreams  were  merely  their 
likenesses.  Since  so-and-so  and  the  said  gentleman  were  likenesses, 
we  know  that  God,  as  perceived  by  Chim  Tse,  was  solely  a  sem- 
blance of  God. 

The  oncirocritics  say  that,  w  han  a  man  dreams,  liis  soul  goes 
out.  Accordingly,  when  lie  sees  God  in  a  dream,  tlie  soul  ascends 
to  lieavi'n.  Aset'iuling  to  heaven  is  like  going  up  a  mountain.  When 
we  dream  of  ascending  a  mountain,  our  feet  "limb  up  the  mountain, 
and  our  liand  uses  a  stick  ；  then  we  rise.  To  mouut  up  to  heaven 
there  are  no  steps,  how  should  、、('  rise  tl"、n?  Tlie  distance  from 
lieaveu  to  us  amounts  to  upwards  of  ten  thousand  li.  A  man  on 
a  journey  uses  to  travel  oat*  hundred  ii  daily.  As  long  as  the  soul 
is  united  to  tlie  body,  it  cannot  move  very  rapidly,  how  murh  less, 
wlien  it  walks  alone  ！  Had  the  soul  moved  with  the  same  speed 
as  tlie  body.  Cliieu  Tse  would  have  required  several  years  for  liis 
ascension  to  lieaveu  and  liis  return.  No、v,  lu*  awoke  after  seven 
days,  and  became  conscious  again.   Flow  could  the  time  be  so  short? 

The  soul  is  the  vital  fluid  ：  tlie  moveuierit  of  the  vital  fluid  is 
like  tliat  of  clouds  ami  log,  and  cannot  be  very  (juifk.  Even  if  the 
soul  moved  like  a  flying  bird,  it  would  no\  be  very  rapid.  Some- 
times people  dream  tiiat  they  are  flying:  tlie  flying  is  done  by  tlie 
soul,  but  it  could  not  be  quicker  tlian  the  flight  of  a  bird.  That 
fluid  ol'  heaven  and  earth  wliicli  possesses  tli»，  "rt-alest  speed  is  the 
storm,  yet  a  storm  does  not  blow  a  whole  day.  Provkltnl  that  the 
soul  were  flying  like  the  stonn,  its  speed  would  not  last  longer  than 
one  day,  and  it  would  be  unable  (o  reach  heaven. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


229 


When  a  mau  dreams  that  lie  ascends  to  heaven,  it  is  during 
the  short  span,  、vhile  he  lies  down.  At  his  awakening,  he  is  per- 
haps still  iu  heaven,  and  not  yet  descended,  as  a  person,  dreaming 
of  having  arrived  at  Loyang,  still  finds  himself  in  Loyang,  when 
roused.  How  can  the  fliglit  of  the  soul  be  deemed  quick?  Rapidity 
is  not  in  its  nature,  consequently  tlie  ascension  to  licaveu  was  not 
real.  Not  being  real,  it  must  have  been  a  supernatural  omen.  The 
man  on  the  road,  perceived  by  Viscount  Chien  iu  his  sickness  by 
God's  side  and  subsequently  met  on  the  road,  speaking  like  a  man, 
was  the  same  with  the  one  whom 】ie  hail  seen  near  God.  There- 
fore the  explanation  that  a  dream  during  the  sleep  is  a  state  of 
obscuration,  winch  can  be  interpreted,  when  the  sleeper  awakes  to 
light  again,  is  quite  correct. 


When  Viscount  Hsiang  of  Chao  had  been  appointed.1  the  Earl 
of  Chih  becamo  more  and  more  arrogant.  He  asked  land  of  Han 
and  HV»,2  which  Han  and  Wei  gave  him.  Then  he  matle  tlie  same 
demand  to  Cftao、  but  Chao  refused.  Tliis  roused  his  anger  to  such 
a  degree,  that  with  troops  of  Han  and  Wei  he  assaulted  Hsiang  Tse 
of  Chao.  Viscount  Hsiang  alarmed  fled  to  Chin-yntig^  and  sought 
shelter  there.  Yuan  Kuo  followed  liim.  When  he  liad  arrived  at 
tlie  post-town  of  To-piny^  lie  beheld  three  men,  wlio  1'roin  the 
belt  upwards  were  visible,  but  invisible  from  tlie  belt  downwards. 
They  handed  two  joints  of  bamboo,  still  unopened,  to  Yunn  Kuo 
saying,  u  Forward  this  for  us  to  Wu  Hsil  of  Chao."  Upon  this  he 
told  Hsiang  Tse.  Hsiang  Tsc  first  having  fastt-d  three  days,  person- 
ally cut  open  the  bamboo,  which  contained  a  red  letter  reading  as 
follows:—"  Wu  Ihil  of  Chao !  We  are  the  Iftto-t'ai  Mountain,6  the 
Marquis  of  Yang,  and  the  Son  of  Heaven.7  On  the  ping-/isil  day  of 
the  third  moon,  we  will  cause  you  to  destroy  Chih,  and,  provided 
that  you  sacrifice  to  us  in  a  hundred  cities,  we  will  also  give  the 

. 1  In  456  b.c.  (cf.  above  p.  22(i). 

1  /.  e.  the  viscoants  of  Han  and  Wei,  who  together  with  those  of  Chao  had 
usurped  the  power  in  Chin. 

3  Near  T  ai-yuan-fu  in  Shanxi. 

*  The  Shi-chi  calls  this  place  which  was  situated  in  Chiang-chou 

(Shansi), 

h  The  personal  name  of  Viscount  TlMang  (cf.  p.  22fi). 

6  A  mountain  in  Yunr/-an-hmrn  (ShanM)  Ilo-tvng  circuit. 

7  The  reading  of  the  Shi-chi:  - "  Marquis  of  Shan-yany  (name  of  city)  and 
Envoy  of  Heaven     seems  preferable. 


no 


Lun-Heng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


territory  of  the  Lin  Hu1  to  you." ― Hsiang  Tse  made  obeisance  a^ain, 
and  accepted  the  commands  of  the  spirits. 

What  does  that  mean?  This  was  an  augury  of  Hsiang  Tse  > 
future  victory.  The  tliree  States  were  beleaguering  Chin-ynng  for 
over  a  year.  They  diverted  the  Fen 2  and  flooded  the  town,  so  that 
only  three  blocks3  of  the  city  wall  were  not  submerged.  Viscount 
Hsiang  inglitencd  sent  bis  minister  Chang  Meng  7^ an  to  open  secret 
negotiations  with  Han  and  Wei.  They  made  an  agreement  with  him, 
and  on  the  ping-Iisil  day  of  the  third  month  they  completely  an- 
nihilated Chih,  and  divided  his  country  among  tbeni.4 ― Therefore 
the  fluid  of  the  supernatural  portent  was  »liaped  like  a  man.  and 
called  itself  the  spirit  of  the  Huo-t  oi  Mountain,  as  the  apparitions 
in  tlie  Hsin  palace  had  the  form  of  dragons,  and  called  themselves 
Princes  of  Pao}  Chien  Tse  s  omen  liad  human  shape,  and  pretended 
to  be  an  envoy  of  God. 

How  do  \vc  know  that  it  was  not  the  spirit  of  the  Uw-t  oi 
Mountain?  Because  a  high  mountain  is  a  formation  of  the  eartli 
just  as  bones  and  joints  are  of  the  human  body.  How  can  bones 
and  jointu  be  spiritual?  IT  tlie  high  mountain  had  a  spirit,  it  slinuld 
be  shaped  lilu'  a  high  mountain.  What  people  call  ghosts  is  the 
essence  of  tlie  departed,  in  appearanct*  they  are  formed  like  living 
men.  Now  the  high  mountain  was  broad  and  long,  and  not  at 
all  like  a  man,  but  its  spirit  did  not  differ  from  a  man.  Such  being 
the  ca«e,  the  ghost  resembled  a  man,  and  since  it  was  like  a  man. 
it  must  have  been  the  fluid  of  a  supernatural  portent. 


In  the  36th  year  of  the  reign  of  Ch'in  S/nh  lhiang  Ti6  Mars 
oflfusrated  tlie  constellation  oi*  the  Heart,  and  a  star  fell  dowo. 
When  it  readied  the  earth,  it  became  a  stone,  on  which  were  en- 
graved the  following  words:—"  Ch'in  S/tih  Flttang  Ti  will  die,  and  his 
land  will  be  divided." 


1  A  snbdivipion  of  the  Hu  tribes,  probably  Mongols. 

3  A  tributary  of  the  Huang -ho. 

8  One  "pan" 板， block  is  said  to  measure  S  teet.  The  Shi-chi,  chap.  43. 
p.  13，  writes  ： 版. 

4  So  far  the  narration  has  been  culled  with  some  omissions  and  alterations 
from  the  Shi-chi,  chap.  43,  p.  12  v.  scq. 

s  When  tlie  Ihia  dynasty  had  begun  to  decline,  two  divine  dragons  made 
their  appearance  in  the  imperial  palace,  and  said  that  they  were  two  prim  es  of  Pan. 
Cf.  Chi  chi,  chap.  4.  p.  2:>  iCharonnr.*,  Mn„.  Vol.  I,  p.  281)  whith  quotes  the  Kuo-yu. 

f'  211  i..c. 


、 Digitized  by  Google 
^  


Spook  Stones. 


231 


When  ('fiin  S/ii/t  Huang  Ti  heard  of  it,  he  ordered  a  censor  to 
interrogate  the  people  one  by  one,  but  nobody  would  confess.  Where- 
upon the  emperor  had  all  the  people  living  near  the  stone  arrested 
and  put  to  death.  The  weird  stone  lie  then  caused  to  be 山' s- 
troyed  by  fire. 

When  his  ambassador,  coming  from  Tnuy-kiuin,1  had  passed 
Ihm-yin 2  at  night-time,  and  come  iuto  the  open  country,  a  man 
with  a  jade  badge  in  his  hands  liappeued  to  block  his  passage. 
" Transmit  this  to  the  prince  of  the  lino  ImIcc%  for  me,"  said 
the  man,  and  went  on  saying,  "  This  year  the  dragon  ancestor 
will  die.'" 

The  ambassador  was  just  going  to  ask  him  for  particulars, 
when  the  man  disappeared,  leaving  his  badge.  This  the  ambassador 
took,  and  apprized  the  emperor  of  everything.  W in  S/iiJi  Huany  Ti 
kept  silent  for  a  long  while,  then  lie  exclaimed,  "  The  spirit  of  the 
mountain  knows  only  the  affairs  of  one  year.  The  dragon  an- 
cestor, of  wlmm  lie  speaks,  must  be  a  lore  fat  her,  however."  lie 
then  gave  orders  to  the  imperial  household  to  examine  tlie  badge. 
They  jiscertained  that  it  was  a  badge  which  had  been  thrown  into 
the  Yangtse,  while  it  was  crossed  in  the  28th  year  of  the  emperor's 
reign.4  The  next  year,  tlie  37th  of  his  rdgn,  he  had  a  dream  that 
he  Avas  fighting  with  the  spirit  of  the  ocean,  which  was  shaped 
like  a  m»D.B 

What  does  this  mean  ？  All  these  were  auguries  of  C/iin  ShiA 
lliumy  T"  impending  death.  Having  dreamt  that  be  was  trying 
conclusions  with  the  spirit  of  tlie  ocean,  lie  entered  into  the  sea 
in  high  dudgeon,  waiting  for  the  spirit,  and  shot  at  a  huge  fish. 
From  Lwiy-yt-h 8  to  the  Lao  and  Ch'eng  Mountains7  he  did  not  per- 
ceive any,  but  having  arrived  at  the  Chefoo  Mountain,8  he  again  came 


1  A  place  at  the  bend  of  the  Yellow  River  in  Sfumn. 
s  A  town  half-way  between  Tung-kua»  and  Hm-an-fu. 

s  The  Han  Lake  was  near  Hsi-an-fu.  the  capital  of  Ch'in  Shift  Huang  Ti, 
who  is  meant  by  the  prince  of  the  lake. 
♦  219b.c. 

5  The  foregoing  are  extracts  from  the  Shi-chi,  chap.  fi，  p.  24  v.  seq. 
c  On  the  south  coast  of  Shnntung. 

7 勞成 山' The  Slii-vhi  writes  Yun9-ch,ng 榮成山 (loc.  dt.  p.  28). 
The  I^io  'hurt  and  the  ('/"，",/  gfutn  air  two  mouiilain  ranges  in  Chi-tno  (Kiao- 
c/toti)  reaching  to  the  sea.  The  Tn-nhih  yii  c/ii  yiw,  cha[>.  3(3  rejects  the  reading 
Yung-ch'i'~ng,  The  mountains  must  ha、v  Iicpm  on  tlie  sca-sliore,  north  of  Lang-yth  and 
south  of  (  hff»a.  for  this  、va、  the  way  taken  bv  tlie  emperor,  as  results  from  Lun- 
hi-ng  Bk.  IV,  0  (Shu-h^ii)  and  Bk.  XXVI,  1  (Shih-chih). 

h  Tlie  <  '/tf/u't  rromomor) ,  forming  tlit'  liarl>our  of  the  trcaty-potl  Chrfon. 


Digitized  by  doogle 


232 


Lmi-H^ng:  B.  MeUphysicnl. 


in  view  of  euonnous  fishes,  of  which  lie  killed  one  by  a  shot  with 
his  arrow. 1  Hence  he  proceeded  along  tlie  sea-shore  as  far  as  1、'  ing- 
yium 2  ford,  where  lie  was  taken  ill.  When  lie  had  reached  Slia- 
ch' i"?  he  collapsed  and  b readied  his  last. 

At  the  time  of  the  falling  star,  Mars  provoked  the  unlucky 
augury,  therefore  the  people  dwelling  near  the  stone  cut  char- 
acters into  it,  as  though  they  had  done  so  purposely.  The  in- 
scription was  to  the  effect  that  Ch'irt  S/ii/t  Huang  Ti  whs  going  to  die 
or  to  he  killed.  The  queer  sayings  of  children,  of  wliich  we  liear 
sometimes,  are  likewise  not  of  their  own  invention,  but  they  have 
been  inspired  by  some  force.  All  sucli  supernatural  apparitions  are 
cither  ghosts  shaped  like  m«n,  or  men  behaving  like  ghosts.4  The 
principle  is  the  same  in  both  cases. 

Ch'uuy  Erh,  prince  of  C7i/h,5  having  lost  his  country,  had  nothing 
to  eat  on  his  journey.'  He  asked  some  labourers  on  the  field  for 
food,  but  they  gave  him  a  clod  of  earth.7  The  prince  became  an- 
gry, but  Chiu  Fan  said  to  liim,  "This  is  very  auspicious.  Heaven 
grants  you  earth  and  land."8  Subsequently  tlie  prince  recouqufrrd 
his  country,  and  was  re-instated  upon  liis  soil,  as  Chiu  Fan "  had 
predicted. 

T  ien  Tan  of  Ch  i,10  defending  the  city  of  ('hi-mo，、、  wished  tn 
deceive  tlie  army  of  therefore  lie  said  tliat  the  Spirit  of  Heaven 
had  come  down  to  lielp  liim.  A  man  stepped  forward  and  declared 
that  lie  could  act  as  the  Spirit.  T  u-it  Tan  then  went  and  still  made 
obeisance  before  liim.  And,  in  fact,  the  rumour  that  a  spirit  had 
come  down,  spread  among  the  soldiers  of  Yen.  They  believed  in 
the  spirit,  and,  when  still  further  tliey  had  viewed  the  oxen  shining 
in  five  colours,  tliey  became  so  alarmed  by  this  belief,  that  the  army 


I  According  to  the  S/u-chi  the  emperor  shot  those  big  fishes  with  a  repenting 
cro9s-bou-  (lien-nu)  2l|f  ？ ^  ，  (o"  which  cf.  inv  article  on  the  Chinese  Cross-bow  in 
Verhandlungen  der  Berliner  GrfirUnchaft  fur  Anthropfjloyit  1S1K5,  ji,  272). 

3  In  the  (，hi-nan-fu  prefecture,  Shantung. 
8  In  Shun-^fu  (Chili). 

4  As  though  under  a  spell  or  a  charm,  which  !s  the  supernatural. 

5  Later  Duke  Wrn  of  Chin,  634  U27  b.c. 

6  Banished  from  (  hiny  he  lived  for  many  years  in  other  States. 

7  This  happened  in  Wn%  whose  prince  hud  treated  him  discourteously. 

8  Cf.  Tno-chuan、  Diike  IlM  23d  year,  where  the  incident  h  told,  though  with 
other  words. 

*  Called  Tfte  Fan  in  the  Tso-chuan. 

10  An  official  of  (、Ki、  who  delivered  his  country  from  the  invading  army  of 
1'en,  in  the  3rd  cent.  b.c. 

II  Cit>  in  Sfutntung9  near  Kiao-chott. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


233 


was  discomfited,  and  the  soldiers  routed.1  T  ien  Tan  gained  the 
victory,  and  could  recover  the  lost  territory.  In  tlieso  apparitions 
there  wore  men  resembling  ghosts. 

Wlien  tlie  ambassador  passed  Hua-t/in,  an  iiulividual,  with  a 
jade  badge  in  his  hands,  blocked  his  passage,  and  went  away, 
leaving  him  the  badge.  This  was  a  ghost  in  human  shape.  The 
jade  badge  Iiad  been  thrown  into  the  Yangise  for  ttie  purpose  of 
praying  for  happiness.  Now,  tin-  badge  was  returned,  wliicli  showed 
that  the  offer  was  not  accepted,  and  that  liappinoss  could  not  be 
obtained. 

The  badge  \va«  like  that  which  formerly  had  been  submerged, 
but  it  was  not  really  the  same  for  the  following  reason.  When  a 
ghost  appears  in  human  shape,  it  is  not  a  genuine  man.  If  people, 
after  having  seen  a  gliost  looking  like  a  living  man,  thoroughly 
question  other  living  men,  tliey  will  find  out  that  none  of  them 
have  come  to  see  tliem  Conseijuently  a  supernatural  force  has  ap- 
peared to  them  in  human  l'orm.  Since  this  force  has  merely  taken 
liuinan  shape,  tlie  things  carried  by  the  apparition  cannot  be  real 
things  either. 

By  the  dragon  ancestor,  whii:h  was  to  die,  Cfiin  Shih  Huang 
Ti  was  designated.  Ancestors  are  tlie  root  of  mankind,  and  a  dragon 
is  an  image  of  a  so\_ereign.  If  there  be  a  resemblance  between  man 
and  other  creatures,  a  disaster  concerning  one  part  likewise  affects 
the  other.3 


In  the  year  of  Ch'in  Shift  Huang  It's  death  the  Emperor  Han 
Kao  Tsu,  was  a  village-elder  in  Sse-shang.^  As  such  he  liad  to  escort 
convicts  to  the  Li*  Mountain,  but  most  of  them  escaped  on  the 
road.  Kao  Tm  then  allowed  tlio.se  lie  had  still  in  his  power  to 
run  away,  which  they  tlid  never  to  return.  Kao  Tm，  who  was 
under  tlie  influence  of  liquor,  was  eontiuuinj;  his  journey  through 


1  Tien  Tan  used  a  similar  stratagem  as  Hannibal.  During  the  night  he 
fantastically  dressed  1000  oxen,  tied  sli.irp  blades  to  tlie  horns  and  greased  rushes 
to  their  tails,  and  lighting  these  rushes  let  them  loose  against  tlie  enemy,  who  wei*c 
taken  by  surprise  and  cotnplelely  boaten  hy  the  mon  of  Yen  following  in  the  rear. 
Vid.  the  biography  of  Tien  Ton  in  th«  Sh,-cf",  diap.  S2,  p.  3. 

a  Therefore  the  death  of  the  dragon  implies  the  find  of  tl"，  emperor. 

3 洒上. The  Shi-rhi  chap.  S,  p.  Uv.  writes  Sm -， fmi  水， which  was  a 
district  in  the  present  Ycn-chou-fu  (Shuntung). 

*  A  mountain  near  Ch'in  Shih  Iluamj  'IV ，  mausoleum  in  Shansi,  which  was 
built  by  convicte. 


Digitized  by  Google 


2：\  \  T.uii- Hoi.tr：  B.  M,,f;i|,l— al. 

a  marsh  at  night,  and  had  ordered  a  ，nan  to  keep  in  front.  This 
man  came  back  and  reported  that  there  was  a  big  snake  in  front, 
obstructing  the  way,  and  besouglit  him  to  go  back. 

"What  does  a  valiant  warrior  fear?,"  asked  Kao  Tsu  inebriated, 
and  lie  wi'nt  forward,  drew  Iiis  sword,  and  with  one  stroke  cut 
tlie  snake  in  two.  The  patli  was  free  then.  After  he  had  pro- 
ceeded still  several  miles,  his  intoxication  caused  him  to  fall  asleep. 

When  Ktw  Tsu\s  companions  arrived  at  the  place,  where  the 
snake  was  lying,  they  found  there  an  old  woman  crying  over  it  in 
the  silence  of  night.  Tliey  a^ked  lier,  wherefore  she  cried.  "  A  man 
has  killed  my  son,"  replied  the  old  woman. ― "  How  was  your  son 
killed?,"  asked  the  men. — "  My  son,"  said  the  woman,  "  the  son  of 
the  White  Emperor,  、vaa  transfonncd  into  a  snake  to  keep  watr,h 
on  the  path.  Now  the  son  of  the  Hetl  Emperor  has  slain  him. 
therefore  I  cry." ― The  men  thought  that  the  old  woman  was  telling 
spook  stories,  aud  were  going  to  give  her  a  flogging,  w  lien  the  old 
woman  suddenly  disappeared.1 

What  does  this  signify?  It  was  a  felicitous  omen  of  Kao  Tsu's 
rising  to  j)o\ver.  The  old  woman  suddenly  vanished.  Since  she 
became  invisible,  she  cannot  have  been  a  human  beiug,  and  not 
being  human,  she  must  have  boon  a  spectre.  Since  llie  old  dame 
was  not  human,  it  is  plain  that  thti  slain  serpent  was  not  a  snake. 
The  old  woman  spoke  ot*  it  as  the  son  of  the  White  Kmperor,  but 
Avhy  did  lie  beoomo  a  snake,  and  block  the  road  at  night?  Sho. 
asserted  that  the  serpent  was  the  son  of  the  White  F^mperor  and 
Kao  Tsu  that  of  the  Hed  Emperor.  Thus  the  son  of  the  White 
Emperor  would  liave  become  a  snake,  and  the  son  of  the  Red  Em- 
peror, a  man,  w  liereas  the  Five  Planetary  Emperors2  are  all  heavenly 
spirits.  In  ono  i'jisc  the  son  would  have  grown  a  serpent,  in  the 
other,  .a  man.  Men  and  snakes  are  different  creatures,  wJiereas  the 
Emperors  all  belonii;  to  the  ！ same  class  of  beings.  The  human  state 
of  those  sons  would  not  be  cunionuablc  to  the  laws  of  heaven. 

And  iurtlicr,  it'  t  lie  snake  was  tlie  sou  ot*  the  White  Emperor, 
was  tlie  oM  woman  tlit*  Wliite  Km  press  perhaps?  An  empress  must 
have  hor  suite  iti  front  and  lieliind,  and  an  imperial  prince,  a  large 

1  Tli"  story  ；、  (piotod  I'roiu  tin-  Sf"-''f"、  din]).  S.  j)  ",.  It  is  meant  as  a  pro- 
[»ln'cv  of  ilic  (,、■<— 'rtl""、v  i>f  xhc  ('Kin  rlynast  v  \\\  i!iat  '、1' //''".  The  Ch'in  tisod  metal, 
to  w!t;ch  ，卜' •  while  小 mr  <''''r【'''、poii(l'''l,  ； is  tlie  svmhol  of  (heir  power,  whereas  the 
H"'i  rclii  ii  on  lir*:.  whirli  1i;i、  a  n'(l  rolour.  Atro:  ^ing  to  Cliiuesc  symbolism  fire 
,  ovorconies  motal.  ('rg(»  tin-  C/i'in  were  doonifd  to  Ik:  o\  erpowered  hy  the  Han. 

1  Tlie  Five  I'l.met.s  wliirh  from  ancient  times  were  worshipped  as  deities. 
Tl"'  Hfd  Kmperor  is  M.u>.  tit..'  Wliito  Kniperor  Voin:s. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Spook  Stories. 


2Hf, 


retinue  of  officials.  Now,  the  snake  died  on  the  [>athway,  and  an 
old  woman  cried  on  the  road  ！  This  makes  it  evident  that  her 
statement  about  the  son  of  the  White  Kniperor  was  not  true.  Not 
beinjr  a  real  prince,  it  was  a  semblance,  and  being  a  semblatKC,  it 
was  an  apparition.  Conscquontlv,  cvcrytlnDg  seen  was  not  genuine, 
and  not  beinjj  genuine,  it  was  a  fluid.  The  serpent  slain  by  Kao 
Tm  was  not  a  serpent. 

When  Duke  Li  of  ('h',bnj、  was  on  the  point  of  entering  into 
bid  dukedom,2  a  snake  in  the  city  was  lighting  with  one  outside 
the  city,?'  but  tliey  wore  not  genuine  snakes.  It  was  a  supernatural 
force  marking  Duke  JJ'.s  entrance  into  Ch eng  under  tlie  form  of 
contending  snakes.  The  fighting  serpents  of  the  Ch  eng  State  were 
not  snakes,  hence  we  infer  that  the  two  dragous  in  the  ILia  palace4 
were  merely  images  of  dragons  likewise.  Such  being  the  case,  、、'(， 
are  convinced  that  the  dragons,  \vhit;h  were  fighting  during  Tae  Ch  an 
of  Ching's  time,8  have  not  been  dragons. 

The  ways  of  Heaven  are  hard  to  understand.  There  are  ap- 
paritions, when  things  are  all  right,  and  there  arc  also  some,  wlien 
things  go  wrong. 


Clmny  Lmntf,  Marquis  of  Liu,  dealt  a  blow  at  Ch'in  Shift  Huang 
Ti  witli  a  club,  but  by  mistake  hit  one  of  the  chariots  of  his  retinue.6 
Ch  'tu  S/iih  Huany  T;、  infuriated,  gave  orders  to  searHi  for  (-hang  Liang 
everywhere,  but  he  changed  his  name  and  concealed  liiinself  in  Ilsia- 
pei,7  where  he  had  always  leisure  to  stroll  about  at  pleasure.  Up 
the  river  Sse,s  there  was  an  old  man  in  coarse  clothes,  who  came 
to  Chang  Lmngs  place.  He  had  just  lost  one  shoe  down  the  river, 
therefore  he  said  to  Chang  Limit/,  "  Go  down,  and  fetch  me  my  shoe, 
my  boy." 一 Chang  Liamj  grew  angry,  and  was  going  to  give  him  a 

>  699  694  B.r. 

a  Duke  Li  had  been  forced  to  quit  his  country. 

3  Cf.  Tso-chtan,  Duke  (  huang  14th  year.  The  snako  inside  the  city  was  killed. 
*  Vid.  above  p.  2»  '. 

s  The  Tm-chuan,  Duke  Ch'ao  H'th  year  (522  B.r.)  relates:-  -il  There  were 
great  floods  in  Cfu'ng;  and  some  dragons  fouglit  in  tin;  pool  of  W  ri,  outside  tlic  Shi 
gate.  Tlie  people  asked  leave  to  sacrilicc  to  tlu'i":  but  7'»r  ('/"〃'  refused  it,  saying, 
*  If  we  are  fighting,  the  dragons  do  not  look  at  'is;  when  dragons  are  fighting,  why 
shouJd  we  look  at  them?'"  {Ugge  Vol.V.  P.  II,  p.  C75). 

0  Chang  Liang  had  engaged  a  bravo  to  deal  the  blow  with  an  iron  dub  or 
mallet  weighing  120  pounds. 

7  In  the  modern  P'ci-chou  of  Kiangmi  province. 

s  Instead  of  Sw        the  Shi-chi  writes:—'*  i "  jp^,  the  '•  bridge." 


Digitized  by  Google 


I.un-Hrng:  B.  Melapliysical. 


beating,  but  noticing,  how  strong  the  old  man  looked,  he  repressed 
his  feelings,  and  went  down  to  fetch  the  shoe,  which  he  offered 
him  on  his  knees.  The  old  man  slipped  it  on  his  foot,  and  went 
away  laughing.    Chaiuj  IJwkj  felt  greatly  excited. 

Wlien  the  old  man  had  gone  to  about  a  Li's  distance,  he 
returned.  "  You  can  be  taught,  my  boy,''  he  said,  "  Five  days  hence, 
at  sunrise,  meet  ine  here."  dhawj  Liang  bewildered,  knelt  down  and 
assented.  After  five  days,  ； it  sunrise  Chang  Lianrf  went,  but  the  old 
gentloinau  had  already  arrived  bef«>re  him.  "  Why  must  you  come 
later,  wlicn  you  have  an  appointment  with  an  old  man?,''  asked  lie 
angrily.  "  Five  days  after  my  departure,  very  early,  、vc  will  meet 
again." ― After  five  days  C'/tan^  Liang  went  again  at  coi-kcrow,  but 
again  the  old  mau  had  arrived  before,  and  repeated  his  angry 
question,   wherefore    he   had   arrived   later.     "  Five    days  after 

I  have  left,"  said  he,  "come  again  very  early"— On  the  fifth 
(lay  Chany  Luutg  went  before  inidniglit,  and  after  a  short  while, 
the  old  gentleman  arrived.  "  So  you  are  right,"  said  he,  very 
pleased. 

He  then  produced  a  pamphlet,  which  he  gave  him  saying, 

II  Head  it,  and  y<iu  will  become  preceptor  to  an  emperor.  Alter  thirteen 
years  you  will  sec  me.  A  yellow  stone  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Ku- 
c/i'^ng  in  C/ii-peil  that  is  I."  Whereupon  he  went  away,  saying 
nothing  further,  and  was  not  seen  again.  At  dawn  Chnng  Liang 
looked  at  the  book.  It  was  "  T  at  K""g， ,  Strategy."  Chang  Liang 
amazed,  studied  it  very  thoroughly.3 

What  was  this?  An  augury  of  Kao  Tsus  elevation  by  Chang 
Liang  s  assistance.  Chang  Liang  lived  ten  years  at  Ih-ia-pei  as  a 
knight  and  a  hero.  \V  lien  (，/'.',"  S/u' 1  and  his  con  federates,  rose  in 
revolt,  and  the  (iovornor  of  /'V/5  visited  IhUt-j/ei,  Chony  L'umg  joined 
thein.  Subsecjuontly.  he  was  made  a  general  and  ennobled  wifli 
the  title  Mjirquis  ol,  Liu.  Thirteen  years  latpr,  when  with  Kao  Tsu 
he  crossed  the  「/'''•-/"  t territory,  he  found  n  yellow  stone  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Ku-c/t  «'n<j.  He  took  it,  stored  it  away,  and  worshipped 
it,  and,  wlicn  he  died,  it  was  buried  with  him. 

1   In  Tuiiy-',  district  [S/mntunff). 

- Tlir  liclpm.itc  of  \Y'ii  Want/,  wlio  liail  hcen  invested  witli  the  manjuisate 
oi'  <  h'i  in  S!,,intui>ij  (cf.  p.  1 72) 

5  'I  lio  storv  is  (|Uot.-i]  from  (  hang  Lmni/s  Biograpliy  in  tlie  S/ii-c/ti,  cliap.  55, 
p.  1  \ .,  but  soiuevvliat  ;ibr!(lg»'<i. 

*  A  simple  soldier  who  in  2')!'  v.c.  brouglit  aliout  an  insurrection  against  Erh 
S/iih  I/iciup  7V，  and  assutuetl  the  title  of  a  king  of  f  h  u. 

'' Li ii  Vong  _：  Kan  7'.",，  at  that  time  still  yovonior  of  P  ti  in  h'iant/m. 


Digitized  by  Google 

一 


Spook  Stories. 


2：^7 


This  y<*l low  stone  was  a  supernatural  transformation  conveying 
an  omen.  The  metamorplioses  of  heavon  and  earth  are  most  in- 
genious, for  is  it  not  wonderful  to  make  an  ol<l  man  lake  the  form 
of  a  yellow  stone,  and  a  yellow  stone  tlie  form  of  an  old  mau? 

Some  one  might  a.sk,  wlictlior  the  yellow  stone  was  really  an 
old  man,  and  the  old  man  really  u  yellow  stone.  A  yellou-  stone 
oannot  become  an  old  man,  nor  an  old  man  a  vol  low  stoue.  The 
appearance  of  a  superyatural  portent  made  it  look  so. 

During  the  time  of  Duke  P  htg  of  Chin '  a  stone  spoke  in  Wei- 
i/fi.3  The  duke  asked  the  music-master  K  iumg,  why  the  stone  had 
spuken.  "A  stone  cannot  speak,"  was  tlie  reply.  "  IVrhaps  it  was 
possessed  by  n  spirit,  otherwise  the  people  have  heard  wrong." 3 

A  stone  cannot  utter  human  speecli,  and  so  it  cannot  take 
human  shape.  The  speaking  of  the  stone  is  not  difiVrent  from  the 
falling  down  of  the  stouc  in  Tung-c/ii>n*  in  Ch  in  S/ii/i  Ihuing  Ti'a 
time,  which  was  engraved  by  tlie  people.5  Engraving  gives  an  in- 
scription, and  talking,  speci-li.  Script  and  speecli  fall  under  the  same 
law.  The  people  engraved  the  inscription,  and  a  force  made  the 
speech.  The  nature  of  the  people  and  the  force  is  the  same.  A 
stone  cannot  engrave  itself,  nor  can  it  talk,  and  not  being  able  to 
talk,  it  cannot  become  a  man  either.  "  Tai  Kuny's  Strategy  "  was 
formed  by  the  lbn;e.  How  do  we  know  that  it  was  not  real ？  Be- 
cause the  old  man  w  as  not  a  man,  wltence  、vc  infer  that  the  book 
was  not  Tai  Kung's  Strategy  either.  Since  the  force  could  take 
the  likeness  of  a  living  man,  it  could  liken  itself  to  Tai  Kung's 
Strategy  too. 

Tlie  question  may  be  raised,  how  a  force  could  write  characters, 
having  neither  knife  nor  pencil. ― When  Chung  Tsr,  wife  to  Duke 
Hut  of  Lh，  was  born,  she  had  on  her  palm  the  words:  ―"  Future 
princess  of  Lit."  T'ftng  S/tu  Yil  of  Chin  bore  on  his  hand  the  char- 
acter YiS,  and  ClUng  Chi  Yo  of  Ln  the  character  Yo.n  Iliese  three 
inscriptions  have  been  writ"、n  by  u  spontaneous  nature,  and  thus 
the  force  }iad  composed  the  old  man's  book  of  itself.  The  spon- 
taneous nature  and  the  self-producing  force  must  be  classed  together 
with  the  self-speaking  queer  sayings  of  children.  When  children 
utter  such  strange  things,  they  <lo  not  know,  where  they  got  them 


1  55G-531  B.c. 

a  A  city  in  modem  T'ai-j/uan-ju  (Shantt). 

， Tm-chunn,  Duke  Ch'uo  Stl,  year  {Lrgge  Vol.  V,  Pt.  II,  p.  622). 

*  Circuit  comprising  the  northern  part  of  llonan,  north  of  K ' ai-U-ng-Ui. 

*  Sec  above  p.  230. 
6  Cf.  p.  95. 


Digitized  by  Google 


23iS  Lun-Hpiig:  B.  Metaphysical. 

from,  their  mouths  speak  of  themselves.  The  self-speaking  mouths 
and  the  self-produced  writing  are.  the  active  agents  so  to  say.  This 
argument  may  serve  as  a  cue  for  the  better  understanding  of 
other  events. 

T  ai  Kung  angliug  caught  a  big  fish,  and,  whon  he  cut  it  open, 
there  was  a  letter  in  it  reading,  41  Lil  Hhang 1  will  be  invested  with 
(7/  i."  At  Wu  Wang's  time,  one  cauglit  a  white  lisli,  marked  under 
its  throat  with  tin*  words,  "Give  it  to  /"，".，， 2  There  was  truth  in 
all  this.  In  fine,  the  "  Plan  ol'  the  Yellow  River  "  and  the  Scroll 
oi'  the  Lo  "  s  iudicatod  the  rise  and  fall,  the  progress  and  the 
decline,  and  tlie  opportunities  of  emperors  and  kings.  Tlicre  cer- 
tainly have  been  sucli  writings.  Tliey  were  apparitions  caused  by 
a  supernatural  force  and  lucky  or  unlucky  omens. 

1  The  surname  of  Tai  Kung,  W'-^n  \Vang'»  associate,  who  later  on  became 
prince  of  Ch'i. 

2  The  personal  name  of  H'u  Wang. 

3  Cf.  p.  295. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  ahotit  Ghosts. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 
All  about  Ghosts  ( Tlny-kuei). 

The  ghosts  tliat  are  in  the  world  arc  not  tlie  vital  spirits  of 
the  dead,  they  are  evoked  by  intense  thinking  ami  meditating. 
W here  do  they  originate? 一 With  sick  people.  When  people  are 
sick,  they  are  inclined  to  melancholy  and  easily  friglitened.  In  this 
state  of  miiul  they  see  ghosts  a])pear.  People  who  arc  not  sick, 
are  not  a|)])relionsivc.  Thus,  when  sick  people  lying  ou  their  pillows 
are  haunted  \\  \\\\  lVars,  gliosts  appear.  T  heir  fears  set  them  ponder- 
ing, and  、vlien  they  do  so,  their  eye«  have  visions.  How  can  we 
prove  this? 

Po  Lo 1  was  learning  to  tlistiuguisli  liorses:  everything  he  saw, 
when  siglit-seeing,  took  the  form  of  horses.  A  cook  in  Sung  was 
learning  to  dissect  an  ox.  For  three  years  he  did  not  perceive  a 
living  ox,  those  lie  saw  were  all  dead  oues.'J  These  two  men 
strained  tlieir  mental  powers  to  the  utmost.  By  dint  of  thinking 
and  pondering  tliey  came  to  have  strange  visions.  Sick  men  swing 
ghosts  are  like  Po  Lo  seeing  liorses  or  the  cook  seeing  oxen.  What 
Po  Lo  and  tlie  cook  saw,  were  not  real  liorses  or  oxen.  Hence  we 
know  that  the  visions  of  the  si»k  are  not  real  ghosts  either. 

When  sick  people  have  a  severe  attack,  and  feel  much  pain 
in  their  bodies,  they  believe  that  ghosts  with  bamboos  and  sticks 
beat  them,  and  have  the  impression  tliat  ghosts  with  liaininers, 
locks,  and  cords  are  standing  by  their  side,  watching.  These  are 
empty  visions  caused  by  pain  and  fear.  Wlion  they  first  feel  ill, 
they  become  alarmed^and  see  ghosts  coming.  When  their  disease 
grows  more  violent,  that  they  l'ear  to  die,  tliey  see  the  ghosts  in- 
censed, aud,  when  they  feel  pain,  they  have  tlie  idea  tli;it  tlie  ghosts 
are  beating  them.  It  is  nothing  but  the  effect  of  too  much  ponder- 
ing, but  there  is  no  reality. 

When  the  vital  fluid 3  is  thinking:  or  meditating,  it  flows  into 
the  eyes,  tlie  mouth,  or  tlie  oars.   When  it  Hows  into  the  eyes,  the 

1  A  somewhat  legendary  character,  mentioned  by  Chuaruf  7V  chap.  9,  p.  1. 

2  For  more  details  on  this  famous  cook  or  hutcfier  sec  7'.w  rhap.  3,  p.  1. 

3  We  might  translate  mental  fluid,  for  here  the  mental  functions  of  the  vital 
fluid  are  referred  to,  which  is  the  bearer  of  life  as  well  as  the  originator  of  mind, 
ammujf  and  anhna. 


Digitized  by  Google 


240 


Lnn-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


eyes  see  shapes,  when  it  flows  into  the  ears,  the  ears  hear  sounds, 
and,  when  it  llows  into  the  mouth,  the  mouth  speaks  something. 
At  day-time  ghosts  appear,  at  night,  during  sleep,  tliey  arc  heard 
in  dreams.  If  a  person  sleeping  quite  alone  in  a  lonely  house  is 
nervous,  lie  will  see  ghosts  in  his  dreams,  and,  if  imybody  puts 
his  hands  on  him,  he  will  scream.  What  we  see,  while  awake,  or 
hear,  wliile  asleep,  is  all  the  work  of  our  spirit,  of  fears  aud  tliouglits, 
which  amounts  to  the  same. 


There  is  an  opinion  that,  when  people  see  ghosts,  their  vision 
and  their  sleep  are  disturbed.  If  during  the  day  their  vigour  is 
worn  out,  and  their  vital  torw  exhausted,  they  desire  to  sleep  at 
night.  While  they  arc  aslt'ep,  their  vision  is  distorted,  hence  their 
spirit  perceives  the  images  of  men  and  things.  W hen  a  person  is 
sick,  his  vigour  is  worn  out,  and  his  vital  lt>rce  exhauste<l  likewise. 
Although  his  eyes  may  not  be  asleep,  their  seeing  power  is  still 
more  disturbed  than  it*  they  were.  Consequently  tliey  also  behold 
the  shapes  ol*  men  and  tilings. 

The  sick  see  things,  as  if  tliey  were  asleep.  If  they  were  not 
like  dreaming,  they  ought  to  know,  wlien  tliey  see  something, 
whether  they  are  awake,  or  dreaming.  Since  tliey  are  unabli*  to 
distinguish,  whether,  what  tliey  see,  are  ghosts  or  men,  it  is  evident 
that  their  vital  force  is  exhausted,  and  their  vigour  worn  out.  Tlie 
following  will  corroborate  this. 

Madmen  see  gliosts.  Tliey  are  mentally  deranged,  speak  to 
themselves,  and  keep  awav  ironi  sane  people,  all  owing  to  the  severe 
form  of  their  disease,  and  the  disturbance  of  their  vital  force.  When 
people  are  sick,  and  about  to  die,  they  are  very  much  like  madmeu. 
All  the  three  states:— sleep,  sickness,  and  insanity  are  accompanied 
by  a  decay  of  the  vital  force  and  a  disturbance  of  vision.  Hence 
all  those  people  have  visions  of  men  and  things. 


Others  say  that  ghosts  are  apparitions  of  the  fluid  of  sickuess. 
This  fluid  being  stirred  up  strike's  against  other  people,  and  by  doing 
so  becomes  a  ghost  It  imitates  the.  human  shape,  and  becomes 
visible.  Tlius,  when  the  fluid  of  very  sick  jjersons  is  in  a  state  of 
excitement,  it  appears  in  human  form,  and  the  sick  see  it  in  this 
form.  In  case  thvy  fall  sick  in  mountains  and  forests,  the  ghosts 
they  see  will  be  the  essence  of  those  mountaius  and  forests,  and. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  about  Ghosts. 


24 1 


if  their  sickness  breaks  out  in  Ydeh,  they  will  behold  people  of  that 
country  sitting  by  their  side.  Accordingly,  ghosts  like  that  of  Kuan 
Fit  and  Tou  Yingx  were  apparitions  of  that  particular  time. 

The  fluid  of  this  world  is  purest  in  heaven.  The  heavenly 
signs2  present  certain  forms8  above,  and  their  fluid  descends,  and 
produces  things.  When  the  fluid  is  harmonious  in  itself,  it  pro- 
duces and  develops  things,  when  it  is  not,  it  does  injury.  First  it 
takes  a  form  in  heaven,  then  it  descends,  and  becomes  corporeal 
on  earth.  Hence,  when  ghosts  appear,  they  are  made  of  this  stellar 
fluid.  The  bodies  of  the  stars  form  men,  beasts,  and  birds.  (Con- 
sequently sick  people  see  the  shapes  of  men,  beasts,  and  birds. 


Some  maintain  that  ghosts  are  the  essence  of  old  creatures. 
When  creatures  grow  old,  their  essence  forms  a  human  being,  but 
there  are  also  those,  which  by  their  nature  can  be  transformed,  be- 
fore tliey  are  old,  and  then  take  a  liuman  shape.  If  the  fluid  a  mau 
is  endowed  with,  is  the  same  as  the  essence  of  another  creature,4 
there  will  be  some  relation  between  him  and  this  creature,  and, 
when  it  becomes  sick,  and  its  vital  fluid  begins  to  decline,  it  falls 
in  with  that  person  as  a  ghost.    How  can  we  prove  that? 

Those  creatures  wlii»;h  people  usually  have  to  do  with,  ap- 
pear to  them  as  gliosts,  for  what  (lill'erence  is  there  bt'tween  the 
ghosts  seen  by  sick  people  and  those  sick  creatures?  If  people  see 
ghosts  resembling  a  dciid  man  in  his  grave,  who  is  coming  to  meet 
aud  call  tliem,  it  is  ouc  of  the  domestic,  animals  in  their  houses. 
If  they  see  other  ghosts,  unknown  to  them  previously,  those  ghosts 
are  caused  by  other  people's  animuLi  e.  g.  those  in  the  open  fields. 


According  to  another  opinion  ghosts  originally  live  in  men, 
aiul,  when  they  cease  to  bo  men,  they  are  transformed  and  dis- 
appear. The  organisation  of  the  universe  is  such,  that  these  trans- 
formations take  place  indeed,  but  the  votaries  of  Taoism  cannot 
disc 画 this  subject.6 

' See  p.  217. 

*  The  stars. 

•  The  constellations. 

4  This  seems  to  refer  to  the  animals  connected  with  the  twelve  cyclical  signs 
(cf.  p.  106).  A  man  born  under  one  of  these  signs  is  supposed  to  have  been  imbued 


with  the  same  essence  as  the  rorrcsponding  animal  has. 

'- Their  views  are  loo  |,liaiitaM"',  as  can  be  .seen  from  their  works. 


Litn-IIriig. 


Digitized  by  Google 


242 


Lun-H^ng:  B.  MeJapliysical. 


That  which  assaults  men,  is  sickness.  Sick  people  are  doomed 
to  die,  but  tlie  deceased  do  not  give  up  all  intercourse  with  men. 
This  will  beconu'  clearer  i'roin  the  following: 

The  Liki  tells  us  that  Chuan  Ilsil 1  had  three  sons  living  who, 
wlu'ii  tliey  dud,  became  the  ghosts  of  epidemics.  One  living  in  the 
water  of  tlie  Yw'gtse,  became  the  Ghost  of  Fever,  tin*  second  in  the 
•Jo  *  was  a  Water  Spirit,  the  tliird,  dwelling  in  tlie  rorners  of  palaces 
and  houses,  and  in  damp  store-rooms,  would  frighten  children.3  An- 
terior to  Chnan  lhils  time  there  have  been  more  sons  living,  con- 
se(|uently  tliero  must  liave  been  hundreds  of  spirits  like  those  ol* 
('huan  Ihi'is  time.  All  spirits  and  ghosts  possess  a  body,  ami  there 
is  a  inetliod  to  make  them  stand  upright.  Those  who  meet  witli 
jx'oj>le  have  all  lived  in  good  men,  and  acquired  their  fluid,  hence 
i"  their  appoaraiH!v  tliey  are  like  good  men.  That  which  can  injure 
tlie  good  is  the  fluctuating  Yang  and  Yin  fluid,  as  a  iluid  like  tliat 
of  tlie  clouds  and  vapours  it  could  not  do  so. 


Another  idea  is  tliat  ghosts  are  the  spirits  of  tlie  first  and 
second  cv»  lical  signs.4'  These  spirits  are  a  peculiar  fluid  of  heaven. 
In  their  shapes  they  appear  like  human  brings.  When  a  man  is 
sick,  and  about  to  die,  the  spirit  of  the  first  and  second  <lay  makes 
its  appearance.  Provided  tliat  somebody  falls  sirk  on  tlio  first  or 
second  day,  he  will  jK-rhaps  see  the  spirit  of  the  si-venth  or  ciglitb, 
when  lie  (lies.  Why?  Because  the  ghost  of  the  Hrst  and  second 
day  is  tlie  messenger  of  tlie  sevontli  an<l  t'igJjtli,  therefore  tin*  persou 
is  taken  ill  on  the  first  and  second,  and  wlu-n  his  end  is  near,  and 
the  gliost  that  destroys  him  appears,  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  s«n-enth 
and  t'iglitli.  Tlii^  is  evident  from  tlie  fact  that  for  a  malady,  tliat 
broke  out  on  tlio  lirst  or  secoml  day,  the  crisis  wliicli  decides  on 
life  and  dcatli,  sets  in  on  tlie  sevcntli  or  the  eighth. 

Critics  do  not  accept  tliis  view  iis  correct.  Howover,  the  ways 
of  IleavtMi  ar«'  diflicult  to  uiidc^tand,  and  gliosts  and  spirits  ab- 
scond and  hide,  riicrcfore  I  have  wuWA  all  the  diflTerent  opinions, 
tliat  my  coiitemporarie,s  may  judge  for  tlu-m selves. 

1  A  legendary  ruler  of  tlie  2G:li  cent.  b.c. 

- According  to  the  "  Water  Classic  ''  a  river  in  the  -south-east  of  China. 
This  !>；(>. sage  is  not  to  be  found  in  our  Liki.    According  to  the  P"-，n'i，- 
yun-fu  it  is  contained  in  tlie  Sous  hen -chi  (4th  cent.  a.d.). 
*  The  ttigns  chia  and  yi. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  about  Ghosts. 


213 


Some  say  that  ghosts  are  creatures  in  no  way  different  from 
men.  There  are  spiritual  beings  in  the  world,  usually  staying  be- 
yond the  frontiers,  but  from  time  lo  time  coming  to  China,  and 
mixiug  with  men.  These  are  utaliguant  nud  wiekeil  spirits,  lien<-e 
tlicy  appoar  to  men,  who  are  sick,  ami  ^oing  to  die.  As  a  being 
croatcil  in  this  、vorl《l  man  is  like  a  beast  or  a  bird.  Wlion  demons 
:«ro  creat«Ml,  they  also  resemble  men,  or  are  like  bea.sts  or  birds. 
Thus,  unhappy  lain i lies  soe  cor|)ses  Hying  about,  or  crawling  dem- 
ons, or  bt'ings  like  men.  All  three  are  ghosts,  tliey  raay  be  styleil 
ghosts  or  demons,  goblins  or  devils.  They  really  exist,  as  long 
as  they  are,  and  are  not  empty,  formless  beings.  How  do  we 
know? 

(\numonly  people  wl>o  will  be  visited  with  misfortune  see  a 
ray  of  light  (li'socnding  on  their  liomes,  or  they  perceive  sometliiug 
having  tin*  sh;i]>e  of  a  bird  flitting  several  times  into  tlieir  hall, 
but  ou  looking  cart' fully,  they  discover  tliat  it  is  not  like  a  bird, 
《'r  an  animal.  Creatun's  having  a  body  can  cut;  by  eating  they 
afijuirc  activity,  and,  if  tlioy  give  signs  of  activity,  their  body  must 
be  real. 

Tso  Ch  iu  Ming  say«  in  liis  C/i  un-c/i  in: 1 ― "  They  were  banished 
into  the  four  frontier  States  to  repulse  the  goblins  and  ik'vils,"2 
and  the  S/ian-hai-fciiif/  reports  that  in  the  North  tlit'io  is  the  Kingdom 
uf  tho  Ghosts.1  They  say  that  goblins  uro  dragon-liko  creatures. 
Dfvils  arc  also  rolatod  to  dragons,  tlicroforr  tliey  must  resemble 
dragons.  31<)m>ver，  ;i  kingdom  is  delined  as  a  congregation  of  men 
and  other  creatures. 

The  Slian-hai-kwy  also  relates  that  in  the  rnidst  of  the  Green 
Oi'oau  there  is  the  Tu  !>o  Mountain,  on  which  grows  an  enormous 
pca.-h-trce.  Its  girth  iruasurcs  3,00<>  Li.  Bt't、vtu'u  its  boughs  to  rlie 
nortli-cast  there  is  the  so-called  door  of  the  ghosts,  where  tin*  ten 
thousand  ghosts  pass  in  aud  out.  On  tlic  tret*  thrro  arc  two  spirits, 
one  railed  S/ien  Shu,  the  other  Y&  Lfi,  who  have  the  superintendence 
over  all  tho  gliosis.  Tliey  bind  tin*  wicked  ones,  av1»o  luive  wrought 
evil,  witli  reeds,  and  iVt'd  thr  ti^t-rs  with  them. 

Subst'(juoutly  Ilmtug  Ti  worsliippc'l  for  tl>e  purpose  of  expelling 
the  ghosts  tor  ever.  Me  erected  u  huije  human  figure  of  peach- 
wood  and  painted  S/n'n  SJm  and  Yii  Lii  along  with  tigers  and  cords 

1  In  his  commentary  to  the  Ch  itn-ch  iu,  the  Tw-ch'uan. 

2  Four  wicked  princes  were  cast  out  by  Shun  into  the  four  distant  regions, 
which  were  believed  fto  be  iuliabited  by  tlevils.  Tso-chuan,  Duke  ^^  <'n  18th  yeur 
{U(f<jr.  Cln*»k^  Vol.  V,  V\.  I,  p.  2^3). 

Ci.  Slian-ltai-koig  XII,  1. 


Digitized  by  Google 


244 


Lun-H^ng:  B.  Metaphysical. 


of  reeds  hanging  down  on  the  house-doors,  and  thus  frightened 
them  away.1 

Malignant  devils  liave  bodies,  therefore  tliey  can  be  cauglit 
hold  of,  and  thrown  as  food  to  tigers.  Being  eatable  creatures, 
they  cannot  be  unsubstnnlial  or  unreal.  Yi't  these  creatures  have 
a  different  nature  from  that  of  man.  Sometimes  they  are  visible, 
fsometimes  hidden.  Iu  this  respect  they  do  not  diirer  from  dragons, 
which  are  not  always  visible  either. 


Some  people  hold  that  anterior  to  a  man's  fortune  or  mis- 
fortune lucky  or  unlucky  apparitions  become  visible,  and  that,  wlicn 
a  mau  is  approaching  liis  death,  a  great  many  miracles  appear  to 
him.  Ghosts  belong  to  tliesc  miracles.  When  apparitions  and 
miracles  come  forth,  thpy  take  human  form,  or  they  imitate  the 
liuman  voioe  to  respond.  Once  move* I,  they  ilo  not  give  up  liu- 
man  sliajn1. 

Between  lie.iven  and  eartl»  there  are  many  wonders,  in  words, 
in  sound,  and  in  writing.  Either  does  the  miraculous  fluid  assume 
a  human  shape,  or  a  man  lias  it  in  hiinsclf,  and  [)erfonus  the  mir- 
acles. The  ghosts,  which  ap[>ear,  are  all  apparitions  in  liuman 
shape.  Men  <loing  wonders  with  t)\v  fluid  in  them  arc  sorcerers. 
Real  sorcerers  liave  no  basis  for  wliat  they  say,  and  yet  their  lucky 
or  unluclvv  propliecics  fall  from  tlioir  lips  spontaneously  like  the 
quaint  sayings  of  boys.  Tlie  tnoutli  of  hoys  utters  those  quaiut 
sayings  spontaneously,  and  the  idea  of  tlioir  oration  comes  to  wiz- 
ards spontaneously.  The  moutli  speaks  of  it  soli",  and  the  idea  comes 
of  itself.  J  hus  the  assumption  of  liuman  form  by  the  miracles, 
and  their  sounds  are  spontaneous,  and  tlioir  words  come  i'ortli  of 
their  own  accord.    It  is  tlie  same  tiling  in  both  cases. 

They  ！ say  tliat  during  the  time  of  ( 'Itou,'1  ghosts  cried  at  night 
out-side  tlit*  city,  and  that  when  T  sang  H^ieh 3  invented  the  art  of 
writing,  ghosts  wept  at  night  likewise.  If  the  fhiid  cau  imitate 
human  sounds,  and  weep,  it  can  also  imitate  tlie  humau  shape,  and 
appear  in  such  a  form,  that  by  men  it  is  looked  upon  as  a  ghost. 

1  According  to  the  Fnig-m-t'ung  of  the  2nd  cent.  a.d.  tliis  story  is  narrated 
in  the  lluantj  Ti  ,、'hu,  the  Book  of  Ihumg  Ti.  On  New-year's  Kve  tlie  pictures  of 
Shen  Shu  ajid  Yu  Lit  are  still  at  present  pasted  on  the  doorways  as  a  talisman 
against  evil  spirits.  , 

'紂- 

8  A  legendary  personage. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  about  Ghost*. 


243 


A  ghost  that  appears  is  an  evil  omen  to  somebody.  Wlien 
in  this  world  fortuui'  or  misfortune  approach,  they  are  always  ac- 
companied by  portents.  These  come  slowly,  not  suddenly,  and  not 
in  great  numbers.  According  to  the  laws  of  nature,  wlien  a  man 
is  going  to  die,  an  unlu<:ky  phantom  comes  forth  also,  ami,  when 
a  State  is  going  to  perish,  an  evil  portent  becomes  visible.  Con- 
versely, wheu  somebody  is  going  to  prosper,  there  are  lucky  omens, 
and.  when  a  State  is  ijoing  to  flourish,  there  are  signs  indicating 
this  prosperity  befort-haiul.  Good  and  bad  omens  or  portents  are 
the  same  tiling  after  all. 

Now,  however,  the  general  belief  is  that  ghosts  are  not  a 
kind  of  portents,  but  spirits,  wluch  can  hurt  people.  One  does 
not  understand  the  nature  of  portents,  nor  pay  attention  to  the 
transformations  undergone  hy  the  fluid  of  creatures.  Wlien  a  State 
is  near  its  ruin,  and  a  phantom  appears,  it  is  not  this  phantom 
which  ruins  the  State.  \V hen  a  man  is  near  his  end,  and  a  ghost 
comes  forwanl,  tho  gliost  does  not  cause  his  deatli.  Weapons 
destroy  the  State,  and  diseases  kill  man,  as  the  following  example 
will  show : 

When  Duke  Usiang  of  Clii  was  going  to  be  killed  by  robbers, 
lie  travelled  in  K，t-Jhi、  and  subsecjuently  limited  in  Pfi-c/i  iu,}  where 
lie  beheld  a  big  liog.  His  followers  said: ― "Prince  P^tuj  Sfi/ng\"7 
The  duke  got  angry,  and  said,  "  P  ^ng  Slteng  dares  to  show  him- 
self?'' Tlien  lie  pulled  his  bow,  and  shot  the  hog,  wliicli  rose  like 
a  man,  and  howled.  The  duke  became  so  panic-stricken,  that  he 
fell  down  in  his  carriage,  hurt  his  foot,  and  lost  one  shoe.3  After- 
wards lie  waa  assassinated  by  robbers. 

Those  who  killed  duke  Ihiang  were  robbers,  the  big  hog  whicli 
appeared  on  the  road  previous,  was  a  portent  indicating  duke 
llsian^s  impending  <leatli.  People  called  it  P'fng  Sh^ng,  because  it 
resembled  him.  Everybody  knows  that  duke  Ilsiang  was  not  killed 
by  the  hog.  Therefore  it  would  also  be  a  great  error  to  assert 
that  ghosts  o.an  kill  men. 

The  fluid  of  tlie  universe  wliich  forms  pliantoms  foreboding 
evil  is  tlie  solar  fluid.  Phantoms  are  the  same  as  poison.  That 
part  of  the  fluid  whicli  injures  man,  is  called  poison,  that  which 
is  being  transformed,  a  phantom.   People  say  that  the  quaint  ditties 


Two  places  in  the  C'h'i  State,  in  Shantung. 

Pririrc  P'^ntf  Sh>'nt/  was  a  half-hrother  of  Duke  Hsiang  of  f  'h'i,  who  em 


ployed  him  to  murder  liis  brother-in-law,  the  duke  of  Lu.  The  people  of  ('Ki  put 
reng  Sheng  to  death.    Cf.  T<o-ch  ,ian,  Duke  Huan  18th  year  (693  B.C.). 


lotetl  from  the  Tuo-chuan,  Duke  Chunny  8th  year,  corresponding  to  685  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


24G 


Lun-H^ng:  B.  Mftaphysical. 


of  boys  are  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Glimmering  Star1  upon  men. 
There  is  truth  in  these  words.  The  Glimmering  Star  is  the  Fire 
Star  (the  planet  ^Iar>i).  Fire  has  a  poisonous  glare.  Therelore,  when 
Mars  reigns  in  the  sky  during  the  night,  it  means  a  disaster  an，l 
defeat  for  a  State. 

The  fluid  of  tire  flickers  up  and  down,  and  so  phantoms  are 
at  one  time  visible,  at  another  not.  A  dragon  is  an  animal  resorting 
from  tlie  Yang  priuciple,  therefore  it  can  always  change.  A  ghost 
is  the  Yang  fluid,  therefore  it  now  appears,  and  then  abseontls.  The 
Yang  fluid  is  red,  lience  tl"'  ghosts  si-en  by  pooplii  liave  nil  a  uni- 
form crimson  colour.  Flying  demons  ure  Yang,  wliicli  is  fire.  Con- 
sequently flying  demons  shine  like  fire.  Fire  is  hot  and  buniiriir, 
lience  the  branches  and  leaves  of  trees,  on  whicli  those  demous 
aliglit,  wither  and  die. 

In  the  Thtng-fan  of  the  Shiiking  the  second  of  the  five  elemonts 
is  called  fire,  and  tin-  second  of  the  live  businesses  speei'li.2  Spe"«'li 
and  firr  are  tin*  sa»ir  essence,  therefore  the  ditties  of  boys  and 
ballads  are  weird  saying.3  The  words  coiiu"  forth,  and  a  com- 
position is  completed.  Thus  there  are  always  writings  lull  of  tin* 
supernatural.  Tliey  say  that  boys  are  of  the  Yang  fluid.4  hence  the 
weird  sayings  come  from  small  boys.5  Boys  and  sorcerers  have 
the  Yang  fluid  in  tliem,  thm'l'oiv  at  the  great  rain  sacrifice  in  siuii^ 
mer  boys  must  dance,  and  sorcerers  are  exposed  to  tlie  ； Ac- 
cording to  tlie  rites  of  this  sacrifice  tlie  Yi"  principle,  whicli  lias 
separated,  is  united  with  the  Ynny  principle.0 

In  the  same  manner  at  an  tM'lipse  of  the  sun,  when  tin-  Yin 
predominates,7  an  attack  is  made  on  the  Yin  of  the  land.  As  (luring 
an  eclipse,  wliile  the  Yin  reigns  supreme,  everything  belonging  to 
the  Yin  fluid  is  beiug  assaulted,  so  at  the  time  of  a  drought,  wlion 
tlie  Yang  is  in  the  ;u>cendant,  the  indignation  is  directed  against 
all  allies  of  the  Yang.    Sorcerers  belong  to  tliis  class.  Therefore, 


a  Skuking,  llung-fcm  Pt.  V,  Bk.  IV,  f.  and  «i  (Ug9e  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II,  p.  ：?25 
and  326). 

s  All  weird  things  are  manifestations  of  the  Yang,  the  solar  fluid,  which  is  fiery. 
*  The  Yang  priiiciple  is  male. 

&  The  Chinese  believe  tliat  popular  songs  and  sayings  foretelling  future  events, 
of  wliich  they  fiavc  collections,  arc  supernatural  ijispirations  or  revelations.  Hence 
they  bring  tdem  into  connection  with  ghosts  or  .su|iematural  beings.  Wang  Ch  ung 
falls  back  on  the  i'uny  principle  as  the  origin  of  those  quaint  ditties. 

r'  The  Yin  fluid  is  the  rain. 

" Tlie  sun  is  eclipsed  by  the  moon,  wliich  belongs  lo  the  Yin  fluid. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  about  Ghosts. 


217 


when  Duke  Hsi  of  Lu  1  was  visited  with  a  drought,  he  had  resolved 
to  burn  all  the  sorcerers.  Tlie  sorcerers  being  imbued  with  the 
Yang  fluid,  there  are  for  this  reason  a  great  many  sorcerers  in 
the  Yang  region  (the  South).2  Tlie  sorcerers  are  related  to  ghosts, 
accordingly  sorcerers  have  something  diabolical. 

These  sorcerers  bear  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  boys  singing 
those  quaint  ditties.  The  real  sorcerers  know  how  to  determine 
luck  and  misfortune.  Being  able  to  do  that,  they  are  the  mes- 
sengers of  fate.3 

Thus  the  pliant oin  of  S/i^n  Siting 4  appeared  in  a  sorcerer.  Since 
tlu*y  are  filled  with  the  Ynny  fluid,  phantoms  can  appear  in  sor- 
cerers. As  Slieu  She  a  y  appeared  as  a  phantom,  we  may  infer  that 
the  Marcjuis  of  7，"，5  Chuang  Tse  Yi,n  and  the  malignant  ghost7  were 
likewise  phantoms. 

As  the  discontented  spirit  of  the  Marquis  of  Tu  was  a  phantom, 
the  bow  and  arrows  used  by  him  were  the  poison  of  this  phantom. 
The  phantoms  assuming  human  shape,  tlicir  poison  must  have  re- 
sembled human  weapons.  The  ghosts  and  tlieir  poison  being  of 
the  same  colour,  tlie  how  and  arrows  of  the  Manjuis  of  Tu  Mere 
all  re 丄  Tlie  poison  was  like  a  weapon  "se(l  by  man.  therefore, 
when  it  hit  n  man,  he  died,  when  it  hit  him  but  slightly,  he  faded 
away,  but  did  not  die  at  once.  His  incurable  disease  was  the 
effect  of  the  poison. 

Phantoms  either  emit  their  poison,  but  do  not  show  them- 
selves, or  they  show  themselves,  but  do  not  emit  any  poison,  or 
they  produce  sounds,  wliicli,  however,  do  not  fori"  any  words,  or 
tliey  make  known  their  thoughts,  but  do  not  know  their  sounds. 
Sfi^n  Sf^ug  showed  himself  and  pronounced  words,  the  Marquis  of 

' 659- 62(j  b.c. 

1  The  Soutli  is  the  land  of  the  sun,  the  Ynng  principle. 

3  The  foregoing  futile  spet'ijlations  arc  based  on  tlie  gratuitous  analogies,  in 
which  Chinese  natural  [»liilosoj)liers,  starting  from  the  Yi-kintj,  indulge. 

*  Heir-apparent  to  Duke  Hmen  of  the  ( fnn  Slate,  by  whom  he  was  put  to 
death  in  ，； b.c    Wc  leani  from  tlio  T^o-ch  uan,  year  of  Duko  //«',  that  in 

the  gliost  of  the  niurdered  prim  e  appeared  to  nu  oflift  r  oi  Chin,  and  spoke  to  him. 
He  told  him  that  in  seven  days  lie  would  have  a  new  interview  with  him  through 
a  wizard,  and  that  lie  would  take  iiis  revenge  on  Duke  Hui  oi*  (  hin.  Cf.  p.  2<>3. 

1  The  Earl  of  Tu  had  been  unjustly  put  to  death  by  King  Hinian  of  the 
( 'hm  dynasty,  S26  7SO  n.r.  Accoi  dinp  to  a  logonrl  tfic  ghost  of  the  murdered  man 
appeared  to  tlnj  king  while  ituntintf.  H<-  was  dn-sst-d  iit  red,  and  carried  a  red  bow 
and  red  arrows.  One  of  tliese  arrows  tie  .sliot  through  the  king's  heart,  who  died 
on  the  spot.    Cf.  (  f ""瞧 r.、  •，/'",.  //'•".  Vol.  I，  p.  27^  Note  2.  Vid.  also  p.  202. 

c  See  |».  2o2. 

7  Bv  whirli  】>/'  Ki  of  S,in(/  was  killed.   Cf.  chap.  XLI. 


Digitized  by  Google 


218 


Lan  -  H^ng  ：  B.  Metaphysira). 


Tu  became  visible,  and  sent  forth  his  poison.  Queer  songs,  the 
ditties  of  boys,  and  the  words  on  stones  are  thoughts  uttered.1 
The  music  of  the  harp  on  the  P'u  River2  and  the  wails  of  the 
ghosts  in  the  suburb  of  Chou3  were  sounds  produced. 

At  the  appearance  of  ill  omens,  either  mishap  is  impending, 
and  the  omens  appear  in  advance,  or  misfortune  comes,  and  is  ac- 
companied by  those  omens.  Id  that  case  omens  and  poison  arc 
both  at  work.  When  omens  appear  beforehand,  they  cannot  be 
poisonous.  ShSn  Sh^ng  was  an  omen  seen  before,  the  discontented 
ghosts  of  the  Marquis  of  Tu  and  Chuang  Tse  I  were  phantoms 
appearing  simultaneously  with  misfortune. 

When  King  Ihmn  of  Chou,  Duke  Cliien  of  Ym,4  and  Yeh  Au 
of  Sung 5  were  going  to  die,  ill  omens  appeared,  and  the  poison  hit 
them.  When  Duke  Hui  of  Chin  was  to  be  captured, 8  but  Dot  yet 
to  die,  merely  a  phantom  made  its  appearance,  but  no  poison  sliot 
forth.  The  appearance  of  the  Earl  of  Tu，  Chuang  Tse  /,  and  the 
discontented  spirit  however,  were  ill  omens,  announcing  the  im- 
pending deaths  of  King  HsOan  of  Chou,  Chien  of  Yen,  and  Yeh  Ku. 
S/i4n  SliSnff  comiug  forward  was  an  omen  indicative  of  the  captivity 
of  Duke  Hui  of  Chin.  By  Po  Yu  appearing  in  people's  dream  the 
deceases  of  Sue  Tai  and  Kung  Sun  Tttan  were  foreshadowed.7  The 
knitting  of  grass  by  the  old  man  was  an  auspicious  portent  for  the 
victory  of  Wei  K， o,  and  for  the  capture  of  Tu  Hui  at  that  time.8 
The  grey  dog,  by  which  the  Empress  La,  Hou  was  bitten,  was  the 
shape  of  a  phantom  showing  that  her  death  was  near.9  When 


1  The  thonghta  of  ghosts,  uttered  through  the  mouth  of  boya,  singing  queer 
songs,  or  mysteriously  written  on  stonea. 
, Cf.  p.  220. 
8  See  above  p.  244. 

4  Duke  Chim  of  Yen,  503-491  b.c.  I,  p.  382  apeaka  of  Duke  Chien  of  Chao 
and  Lun-heng  Bk.  IV,  p.  5  of  Viscount  Chien  of  Chao. 
s  See  chap.  XLL 

6  Dake  Hui  of  Chin,  649-635  b.c.  In  644  Uie  duke  was  taken  prisoner  by  Ch'in. 
' Cf.  p.  208. 

8  Wei  K'o  waa  a  commander  of  the  forces  of  Chin  in  the  6th  cent  b.c,  with 
which  he  worsted  those  of  the  Ch'm  StaU,  and  took  their  strongest  man,  Tu  Hui, 
prisoner.  He  was  supported  during  the  battle  by  au  old  man  twisting  the  grass  in 
such  a  way  as  to  impede  the  movements  of  liis  enemies.  This  old  man  was  the 
spirit  of  the  father  of  a  concubine  of  VV"«*  A""'*  father,  whom  he  had  saved  from 
death.  Out  of  gratitude  for  the  kindncsa  shown  to  his  daughter  the  spirit  thus  con- 
tributed to  his  victory  and  to  the  capture  of  Tu  Hui.    Cf.  p.  211. 

p  Vkl.  Shi-chi  chap.  9,  p.  8  v.  The  Empress  Lii  Hou  was  bitten  by  a  grey 
dog,  which  suddenly  vanished.  The  diviners  declared  it  to  have  been  the  phantom 
of  J  a  I,  Prince  of  Chao,  whom  Lu  Hou  had  assassinated.  Lit  Hou  died  of  the  bite. 


Digitized  by  Google 


All  about  Ghosts. 


240 


the  Marquis  of  Wn-an  was  near  his  end,  the  portents  had  the  raion 
of  Ton  Ying  and  Kuan  Fm.1 

In  short,  what  we  call  lucky  or  unlucky  omens,  ghosts  and 
spirits,  are  all  produced  by  the  solar  fluid.  The  solar  fluid  is  iden- 
tical with  the  heavenly  fluid.  As  Heaven  can  create  the  body  of 
man,  it  can  also  imitate  his  appearance.  That  by  which  man  is 
born  are  the  Yang  and  the  Yin  fluids,  the  Yin  fluid  produces  his 
bones  and  flesh,  the  Yang  fluid,  the  vital  spirit.  Wliile  man  is  alive, 
the  Yang  and  Yin  fluids  are  in  order.  Hence  bones  and  flesh  are 
strong,  and  the*  vital  force  is  full  of  vigour.  Through  this  vital 
force  he  has  knowledge,  and  with  bis  bones  and  flesh  be  displays 
strength.  The  vital  spirit  can  speak,  the  body  continues  strong 
and  robust.  While  bones  and  flesh,  and  the  vital  spirit  are  entwined 
and  linked  together,  they  arc  always  visible,  and  do  not  perish. 

When  the  solar  fluid  is  powerful,  but  devoid  of  the  Yin,  it 
can  merely  produce  a  semblance,  but  no  body.  Being  nothing  but 
the  vital  fluid  without  bones  or  flesh,  it  is  vague  and  diffuse,  and 
when  it  appears,  it  is  soon  extinguished  again. 

1  Tien  Fen,  Marquis  of  Wu-an,  a  minister  of  the  Emperor  Han  Wu  Ti  had 
in  140  b.c.  caused  tlie  death  of  his  predecessor  and  rival  Tim  Ying.  The  ghost  of 
the  latter  appeared  to  him,  when  he  was  about  to  die.  The  general  Kuan  Fu's  death 
was  likewise  the  work  of  T  ien  Fen.    Cf.  p.  217. 


Digitized  by  Google 


250  I.nn-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 
On  Heaven  {Tan-Cien)- 

In  tlie  books  of  the  Literati 1  we  find  the  statement  tiiat  Kung 
Knng^  struggled  witli  Chtutn  HsTt 3  for  the  empire,  and  tliat  out  of 
anger  tliat  he  was  dcfeatod,  ho  knocked  against  tlie  I 'it  ( 'Itou  Mountain,4 
tlu'reby  causiitt;  tlie  break-down  of  the  "  Pillar  of  Heaven  "  and 
tlie  dt'lnbremfut  of  the  confines  "1'  the  eartli.  But  Sil  \Yah  melted 
mult iool oured  stones,  and  thcnuviJh  plastered  up  tlir  blue  sky,  and 
cut  ofl*  the  Io«^  of  a  sea-turtle,  whicli  slie  erected  at  the  four  cx- 
tromitios  of  the  uni verse.  However,  hraveu  was  not  complete  in 
the  nortli-west,  therefore  sun  and  moon  moved,"  and  there  was  a 
piece  of  tlio  eartli  missing  in  the  soutli-east,  hence  all  the  rivers 
flowed  to  the  ocean.7  This  is  a  very  old  tradition,  believed  by  most 
people.8  Well  ed uca t«'d  persons  will  think  it  strange,  but  they  liave 
nothing  to  say  against  it.  or  if  thoy  hav,'.  they  arc  unable  to  settle 
the  qiu'stion.  Thev  may  also  ho  afraid,  lest  tlie  thing  should  be 
really  true,  and  therefore  dare  not  discuss  it  seriously.  According  to 
the  laws  of  nature  and  from  a  human  point  of  view,  it  is  all  idle  talk. 

【f  u  man  fighting  with  another  lor  thr  empire,  out  of  anger 
that  he  did  not  win,  knocked  against  the  Pn  Chou  Mountain,  and 
t'ausetl  tlie  pillar  of  heaven  to  br«、ak,  and  the  confines  of  the  eartli 
to  be  smaslied,  if  his  streuu;tli  was  like  that,  lie  would  have  no  op- 
ponent on  earth.  Witli  such  a  ibm'  lie  could  engage  tliroc  armies, 
and  tlie  soldiers  would  hv  to  iiirn  like  ants,  and  their  weapons  like 
blades  of  grass.  Wliv  should  \n\  n*scnting  liis  defeat,  strike  against 
Mount  Pu  (  hou  ？ 

There  is  nothing  harder  and  lioavier  than  a  mountain.  J  he 
strength  of  tt»n  t!i<ms;ni(l  men  pusliing  would  not  be  able  to  move 

I  In  Hwu  X,,"  I'sr.    CC.  p.  SO. 
*'-   A  legendary  l»'ing  of  prcliistorir  times. 

3  A  invtli:i-.»l  enipet or. 

4  'I'lu'  /'(  '  lain  Mountain  forms  part  of  ttic  h'un-lun.  wliirh  latter  is  also 
<  ail.-(l  "  Pifl.ir  of  Il.^vni  -  |T  ,>"-'/,,'). 

T!>'、  sister  of  llio  mytliica!  emperor  Fu 
r'    To  wit  IVoni  v.isi  to  west. 
7    The  do'.ui  is  in  the  cast  of  China. 

H  CC.  Left  7  -  V,  T>v. :  where   this  old  tradition  is  told  with  almost  the 

same  words. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Heaven. 


251 


even  a  small  mountain,  and  Mount  Pu  Chon  must  have  been  a  big 
one.  If  it  was  n'allv  the  "  Pillar  of  Heaven,"  it  would  be  a  dif- 
ficult thing  to  break  it.  If  it  w  as  not.  then  it  canuot  be  admitted 
thaf  by  knoi'liing  against  tlio  Pit.  Chou  Mountain  the  "  Pillar  of 
Heaven  "  was  broken.  —(7/i/an  Thil  in  liis  fight  against  Kung  Kung 
might  have  mustered  all  the  soldiers  on  earth  and  all  the  multitudes 
peopling;  the  land  within  tlie  seas,  ho  would  not  liavc  been  a  match 
for  him.    How  should  Kung  Kung  not  have  be<in  victorious? 

Moreover,  is  heaven  air  or  a  body  ？  If  it  be  air,  it  cannot 
he  diflTerent  from  flouds  and  mist.  Then  there  rould  he  no  pillar 
wliicli  might  be  broken.  Since  AVi  Wa  repaired  it  with  stones,  it 
must  b(*  a  body.  If  it  be  so  in  fact,  then  it  is  something  like  gems 
and  stones.  The  substance  of  stones  is  lieuvy,  a  single  pillar  would 
not  be  a  sufficient  support  for  a  tliousaiul  Li.  Not  even  the  peaks 
of  the  Five  Mountains  1  could  prop  lioavcn  as  pillars. 

When  Mount  Pu  Chou  was  struck,  did  it  support  heaven? 
The  mountain  was  broken  bv  Kung  Kung.  At  that  time  heaven 
ought  to  have  fallen  rlown.  How  could  it  be  raised  again,  once 
«:ollapse(l,  and  how  could  the  four  poles  be  erected  with  cut  off 
legs  of  a  sea-turtle?  Some  one  might  say  tliat  a  sea- turtle  was  a 
monster  of  oldon  times  with  imnienso  legs,  and  that  its  legs  there- 
fore could  be  em，t"l  as  the  four  poles. 

Now  Pu  Chou  is  a  mountain,  a  sea-turtle  an  animal.  Origin- 
ally a  mountain  was  serving  as  pillar  of  "heaven.  Kung  Kung 
broke  it,  and  it  was  replaced  by  tht*  legs  of  an  animal.  Bones 
become  putrified,  how  rould  fhey  long  stand  upright?  If  the  legs 
of  a  sea-turtle  could  support  lioavon,  the  body  of  the  turtle  must 
have  been  of  such  enormous  dimensions,  that  it  would  not  have  had 
room  enough  between  heaven  and  cartli.  How  could  Nil  Wa  have 
killed  it,  though  she  was  a  saint  ?  If  she  was  able  to  do  it,  liow  did 
she  manage  it?  Provided  tliat  the  legs  could  he  used  as  tlie  pillars 
of  heaven,  their  skin  must  liavo  been  as  hard  as  stone  and  iron  ； 
swords  as  well  as  lial herds  would  liavr  been  inelTectivc  against  it.  nor 
could  a  sharp  arrow,  shot  from  a  strong  cross-bow,  have  pierced  it. 

We  see  tliat  at  present  heaven  is  very  high  and  far  distant 
from  the  earth.  Tlie  heaven  of  to-day  is  tlie  same  witli  that  of 
antiquity.  When  Kwuj  Kung  damaopd  it.  hoaven  did  not  fall  down 
upon  the  earth.  Nu  Wn  was  hmnati:  a  man  may  bo  very  tall,  lie 
never  will  reach  up  to  heavrn.  When  Su  Wa  、vas  repairing  it,  on 


1  The  Five  Sacred  Mountains  of  CWim:  —  Tai-/f/tan  in  Sftantunp,  Wng-fhnn 
in  Hunan,  HtM-fhan  in  Shrruti,  Wng-shan  in  ( 'hili,  and  Sun^-shan  in  Honan. 


gitized  by  Google 


2:V2 


I.un-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 


what  8t«*ps  did  she  climb  up,  and  on  what  did  she  stand,  while 
doing  her  work  ？  Was  the  heaven  of  olden  days  perhaps  like  the 
roof  of  a  ball,  and  not  far  distant  from  men,  so  that  Kung  Kung 
could  destroy,  ami  N't}  Wa  repair  it?  If  this  was  actually  so,  there 
would  have  been  many  A'fl  Was.  Of  people  living  prior  to  Nil  Wa 
the  Human  Emperors1  were  the  oldest.  Was  at  tlie  time  of  the 
Human  Emperors  heaven  like  a  canopy? 

The  commentators  of  the  Yi/cing  say  that  previous  to  the  sep- 
aration of  the  primogenijjl  vapours  there  was  a  cliaotic  and  uniform 
mass,  and  the  books  of  tlie  Literati  speak  of  a  wild  medley,  and 
of  air  not  yet  separated.  Wlien  it  came  to  be  separated,  the  pure 
elements  formed  heaven,  and  the  impure  ones  earth.  Accord  in »  to 
the  expositors  of  the  Yiking  and  tlie  writings  of  the  Literati  the 
bodies  of  heaven  and  earth,  wlieh  they  first  became  separated,  were 
still  small,  and  they  were  not  far  distant  from  each  other,  so  much 
so,  that  hea veil  might  well  have  reclined  on  the  Pu  Chou  Mountain, 
and  tliat  Kung  Kung  could  suiasli,  and  Nil  Wa  repair  it. 

All  beings  filled  with  air  grow.  Heaven  and  eartli  contain 
air,  winch  develops  spontaneously.  A  great  many  years  have  elapsed 
since  their  first  beginning.  Ilonce  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  the 
distance  between  heaven  and  earth  now,  whether  it  be  wide  or  nar- 
row, far  or  near.  What  the  scholars  write  about  it  may  so  far  be 
correct,  the  statement,  however,  that  Kung  Kung  knocked  against 
Mount  Pu  Chou,  broke  the  "  Pillar  of  Heaven,"  and  smashed  the 
borders  of  the  earth,  that  with  liquified  multicoloured  stones  the 
blue  sky  was  repaired,  and  that  the  legs  of  a  sea-turtle  were  cut 
off,  and  set  up  as  the  four  poles,  is  all  the  same  untenable.  Even 
though  a  mountain  might  be  moved,  Kung  Kungs  force  would  not 
suffice  to  break  it.  Were  at  the  time,  when  heaven  and  earth  first 
separated,  the  mountains  small  and  men  great?  How  else  could 
they  have  knocked  against  a  mountain,  and  broken  it? 

The  repairing  of  heaven  by  means  of  five  kinds  of  stones  may 
at  least  be  discussed.  Tliose  stones  might  liavc  worked  like  mineral 
(lru^s  curing  a  disease.2  But  the  cutting  off  of  tlie  】egs  of  a  sea- 
turtle  and  puttinja;  thoin  up  at  the  four  poles,  cannot  be  mentioned 
in  earnest.  It  is  a  long  time  since  Nit  Wa.  Do  the  four  poles  look 
like  the  le^s  of  a  turtle? 

1  These  are  still  believed  to  have  been  preceded  by  a  dynasty  of  sovereigns 
of  Heaven,  and  of  sovereigns  of  Eartli,  »I I  fabulous  heings. 

8  Supposing  heaven  to  be  a  spirit  or  a  human-like  living  being. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Heaven. 


25H 


In  Tsou  Yens 1  book  there  is  a  notice  to  the  effect,  that  there 
are  nine  divisions  of  the  Empire  vk.  the  nine  divisions  forming  the 
tributary  land  of  Yil.  The  Nine  Circuits  of  Yil  are  so  to  speak  but 
one  continent.  If  in  the  "  Tribute  of  Yil  "2  Nine  Circuits  are  men- 
tioned, they  are  the  present  Nine  Circuits  of  the  Empire.  They  are 
situated  in  the  south-east  of  tlie  earth  and  bear  the  name  of  Ch  iJi- 
hsien3  or  ShM-chou 4  (China).  But  there  are  eight  continents  besides. 
Kach  continent  is  hemmed  in  by  the  Four  Seas,  which  are  called  Pai- 
hoi.5   Beyond  the  Nine  Continents  there  is  still  the  Great  Ocean.8 ― 

This  statement  is  extraordinary  and  bewildering  to  the  hearers, 
but  they  are  unable  to  make  out,  whether  it  be  correct  or  not.  Thus 
it  is  being  handed  down  by  books,  which  are  read,  or  repeated  by 
word  of  mouth.  Reality  and  fiction  are  equally  transmitted  to 
posterity,  and  the  world  does  not  distinguish  between  truth  and 
untruth.   People  become  perplexed,  and  a  discussion  is  very  difficult. 

7*vow  Yens  knowledge  did  not  surpass  that  of  Yil.  When  Yil 
controlled  the  deluge,  17  acted  as  his  assistant.7    While  Yil  was 

o  ， 

regulating  the  water,  Yi  noted  all  tilings.  He  explored  the  expanse 
of  heaven,  and  penetrated  to  the  farthest  limits  of  the  earth.  He 
distinguished  what  was  beyond  the  Four  Seas,8  and  thoroughly 
investigated  the  region  within  the  Four  Mountains.9  In  the  thirty 
five  States  he  enumt'rated  all  the  beasts  ami  birds,  plants,  trees, 
minerals,  stones,  waters,  and  earths,  but  he  did  not  say  that  there 
are  still  nine  continents  besides. 

Liu  An,  prince  of  Ihuii  San  10  invited  scientists  like  Wu  Pel 
and  Tso  Wu.  His  palaces  were  full  of  such  men,  who  wrote  books 
on  the  Taoist  doctrine.  In  the  chapter  where  he  treats  of  the 
things  of  the  world  and  the  shape  of  the  earth, 1 1  he  speaks  of 


1  A  scholar  of  the  4th  cent.  B.r.  who  wrote  on  cosmogony  and  geography. 
See  p.  19. 

a  The  well  known  chapter  of  the  Shukiny. 
s  Literally  the  "  Red  Region,'' 赤 縣. 

*  The    Divine  Circuit,"  ^\\. 
' Minor  Sea«, 狗海， 

6  Ying-luti,  毎' 

7  Cf.  p.  330. 

8  The  Four  Seas  supposed  to  surround  the  habitable  land  i.  e.  China. 

3  The  Four  Sacred  Mountains  ： 一  Tai-xfum,  -.、 han,  Ilua-shan  and  Ih'-ng 
than  in  the  East,  South,  West,  and  Noi  tli  of  ancient  China.  The  Stiruj-s/uin  in  tlie 
Centre  is  omitted.   See  above  p.  251. 

w  The  Taoist  philosopher  Huai  Nnn  T、'  rf.  p.  M3f». 

11   Cl»»p.  IV  of  Huai  Kan  7V、  work. 


Digitized  by  Google 


251 


Luii-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


prodigies  and  the  wonders  of  foreign  lands,  lie  also  talks  of  the 
peculiarities  of  tlie  tliirty-fivt1;  countries,  but  does*  not  mention  the 
existence  of  Nine  Continents. 

Tsou  Yen  did  not  travel  as  far  as  Yil  and  Yi  on  eartli,  and 
bis  t'xpericiiL'i'  was  not  ajreater  tliun  that  of  eitlior  \\u  IVi  or  Tso 
Wu.  His  talents  wen'  not  those  of  a  sage,  and  lie  (lid  not  learn 
things  by  a  special  revelation  from  hravon.  H o\v  tlu'n  could  lie 
make  such  stat«*in<Mits  ？  Kxatniiird  by  the  light  of  Yft's  "Mountain 
Book  "  1  and  of  lluai  Nans  cliapter  on  the  shape  of  the  earth,  liis 
words  are  uttt*rly  wrong. 

The  Grand  Annalist 2  says ： 一- ••  In  the  '  Chronicle  of  Yil ' 3  it  is 

that  the  Yellow  Hivcr  lias  its  fountain-head  in  the  K  un-lun, 
which  is  three  tliousatxl  and  live  liundred  IA*  hijjfli.  There  w here 
sun  and  moon  lii'lt'  iu  the  K  un-iuiK  it  is  lull  of  spli'iulour.  On  the 
mountain  there  is  tin1  Jade  Sprini;  and  the  Flower  Lake.5  Now. 
ttl'trr  Chang  C/i'ien  went  as  envoy  to  Bactria,n  lie  traced  the  springs 
of  (he  Yellow  I《iver，  but  did  lit*  see  what  the  Chronicle  relatfs 
about  the  K' un-lun?  In  wliat  it  says  about  tht*  nine  divisions, 
mountains,  and  rivers  the  S/mkiii^  may  be  near  tht"  truth,7  of  the 
wondorful  things  to  be  loiind  in  Yil's  ChronioU'  and  the  '  Mountain 
Hook.'8    I  dare  not  ex[)r«*ss  uiysrlf.'" 

"1  daro  not  express  myself  •，  moans  that  t  lie  re  is  no  truth  in 
tlioni.  K\  ery  one  lias  heard  about  the  liei»ht  of  the  K'uu-lun,  the 
Jadi*  Spiiug.  and  th«'  Flow  «t  I.akf,  but,  when  Chang  C/t  irn  went 
there  personally,  ho  found  that  thoe  things  tlid  not  exist,  lu  ihv 
" Tribute  of  Y"  "  mountains,  rivers,  and  won 山' rf'il  things,  precious 
iiR'tals  ami  stum's  occurring  iti  tlu*  Nine  Circuits  are  all  enumerated, 
but  there  is  no  n'fcreiH'e  to  the  Jade  Spring  or  the  Flower  Lake 
uti  the  K' un-lun.  In  (lie  opinion  oi'  the  Uraiul  Annalist  the  re- 
ports of  the  Moautaiu  liook  "  and  tlie  "Chronicle  of  Yil "  are 
inventions. 

1  The  •'  Mountain  Book  "  ―  S/ton-kin/;  forms  (lie  first  five  chapters  of  the 
" Mountain  and  Sea  Classic  "  Sf,(i"-h<"-k;ng,  whioli  tradition  ascribes  to  }  a  and 
his  minister  }  i,  but  it  is  probably  not  earlier  tliun  tlie  hh  or  the  3d  cent.  B.C. 

2  .、/"-'/"•  chap.  123,  p.  l,»v. 

•  This  book  is  now  lost. 

*  The  Shi-cfu  lias  '2，:A、0  Li. 

5  不 ^  ami 華^ The  S/ii-c/ii  writes:  —  '-  tlie  Sweet  Wine  Spring  and 
tlie  Jasper  Lake": 西曾 W  «»d 

6  C'/iany  Ch  im  started  un  liis  famous  <，xppclit;oii  in  1 22  n.'，. 

7  Tlie.se  HiihjecUs  are  treated  in  tin;  rhaptcr  entitli'd  the  "  Tribute  of  )'m.'' 
h   Tlie  .i/ii-t/ti  writes: 一 The  !Sh'"'-h'"-k,ny. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Heaven. 


255 


In  all  things  wliich  arc  difficult  to  know,  it  is  not  easy  to 
find  out  the  truth. 

The  polo  is  tlie  centre  of  heaven.  At  present  the  world  lies 
south  from  tlie  pole  of  Yii,  ilierefore  tlie  heavenly  pole  must  be 
in  the  north,  heaven  must  be  liigli  then1,  and  more  people  living 
in  that  region.  According  to  the  "Tribute  of  Yll "  the  east  is 
washed  by  the  ocean,  and  tlie  west  covered  with  "  Hying  sand." 
These  must  he  the  extreme  limits  of  】u'a"ui  ami  earth. 

When  the  sun  pricks,  liis  (liaim'tt'r  measures  a  thousand  Li. 
Now,  if  the  suti  is  observed  at  his  rise  from  Yin  and  Chih  hskn  1 
in  K'uei-c/u  on  the  eastern  sea-sliore,  his  diameter  appears  to  be  no 
more  than  two  feet,  wliich  proves  that  the  sun  is  still  very  far. 
Consequently  there  must  be  more  land  eastward.  This  being  tlie 
case,  the  assertion  about  the  pole  being  iu  the  north  and  about 
the  extension  of  heaven  and  earth  is  not  made  at  random.2  In 
this  way  the  statements  of  Tsou  Yen  cannot  be  controverted,  and 
what  the  "  Chronicle  of  Yii "  says  on  mountains  aud  seas,  and 
Huai  Nan  Tses  lucubrations  on  the  shape  of  the  earth  appear  un- 
reliable. 

Tsou  Yen  holds  that  at  present  the  "  land  under  heaven " 8 
lies  in  tlie  soutli-east  of  the  earth,  and  is  called  Ch  Ut  Jtsien  or  Sfien 
chou.  Now,  tlie  heavenly  pole  is  the  centre  ot*  heaven.  If  at  present 
the  "land  under  heaven"  wore  situated  in  the  south-east  of  tlie 
earth,  the  pole  ought  to  appear  in  the  north-west.  Since  in  fact 
it  is  straight  north,  the  work!  at  present  lies  south  of  the  pole, 
lu  regard  to  the  pole  the  world  caunot  lie  in  the  south-east,  hence 
Tsou  Yens  statement  to  this  cflect  is  wrong. 

If  it  were  in  the  south-east,  it  would  be  near  to  tlie  sun's 
rising  place,  and  the  light  of  the  rising  sun  ought  to  appear  bigger. 
Now,  whether  looked  at  from  the  E;istern  Sea  or  fi< mi  the  (iobi, 
the  size  of  the  sun  remains  tlir  same.  Although  the  points  of 
observation  be  ten  thousand  Li  distant,  it  makes  no  difl'erence  in 
the  size  of  the  suu.  That  shows  that  at  pirsiMit  tin*  world  occupies 
but  a  small  part  of  the  expanse  of  the  earth. 


1  Chih  =  must  be  a  misprint,  for  sucli  a  character  is  not  to  be  found 
in  the  dictionaries.    We  ought  to  read  Mou  ―  J  in  and  Mou  were  two  dis- 

tricts of  the  K  uei-chi  circuit  comprising  ( 'hckinny  and  parts  of  Anhui  and  Fukie>» 
under  the  Han  dynasty.  】','》  was  in  the  south-east  of  Mou,  both  .situated  in  the 
present  Ningpo  prefecture.    (Cf.  Knnghi'M  Diet.) 

- Tjiou  Yen't  assertion. 

>  I.e.  the  habitable  land  or  China. 


25G 


Lun-H6ng:  C.  Physical. 


Loyang  is  the  centre  of  the  Nine  Circuits.1  Viewed  from 
Loyaiig  the  uorth-pole  appears  direct  north.  The  shore  of  the 
Eastern  Sea  is  three  thousand  Li  distant  from  Loyang.  Seen  from 
there  the  pole  is  likewise  in  tlie  north.  By  analogy  we  may  safely 
assume  that  viewed  from  the  Gobi  the  pole  will  also  appear  in 
the  north.  Tlie  Eastern  Sea  and  the  Gobi  are  the  eastern  and 
western  borders  of  the  Niue  Circuits,  ten  thousand  Li  distant  from 
one  another,  nevertheless  tlie  pole  appears  always  north.  The  earth 
must  therefore  be  very  small  and  occupying  a  narrow  space,  since 
one  never  gets  away  from  the  pole. 

The  principality  oi'  Ann/tm  (JUt  Nan  i.  e.  the  South  of  tlie  Sun) 
is  ten  thousand  Li  distaut  from  Loyang.  People  who  had  emigrated 
tliere,  and  came  back,  when  asked,  have  said  that,  when  the  sun 
culminates,  his  resting-place  cannot  bo  in  Annam.  If  we  go  ten 
thousand  Li  further  south,  the  sun  tliere  must  reach  his  south-point. 
Then  the  south-point  of  the  sun  would  be  twenty  thousand  Li 
distant  from  Loy"ng.  Now,  if  we  measure  the 山 stance  of  the  way 
made  by  tlie  sun  from  Loyang,  it  can  not  be  tlie  same,  as  if  we 
measure  from  the  north-pole,  because  the  pole  is  still  very  far  from 
Loijany.  Let  us  suppose  that  we  wont  thirty  thousand  Li  north. 
Kven  then  we  would  not  arrive  under  the  pole.  But  provided  we 
(lid,  then  we  could  say  that  we  had  readied  the  place  just  beneath 
the  north-pole.  S'mw  from  there  to  tlie  south-point  tliere  would 
be  fifty  thousand  Li,  there  must  be  fifty  tliousand  Li  north  of  the 
pole  likewise,  ami  under  those  ciiruuistaucos  there  would  also  be 
lifty  thousand  Li  from  the  pole  eastward  and  westward  in  either 
direction.  One  hundred  thousand  Li  from  north  to  south,  and  one 
huudred  thousand  Li  from  east  to  west  multiplied  would  give  a 
million  square  Li.2 

Tsou  Yen  opines  that  between  heaven  and  earth  there  are 
niue  c.ontinents  like  China.  At  the  Chou  period  the  Nine  Circuits 
measured  five  thousand  Li  from  cast  to  west,  and  from  north  to 
south  also  five  thuusatul  Li.  Five  times  five  gives  twenty- five,  one 
continent  thoivfore  would  contain  twenty-five  thousand  square  Li, 
which  would  be  the  size  of  China.3  Twenty-five  tliousand  Li  multi- 

1  Loyang  is  considered  the  centre  of  the  world  i,  e.  China. 

a  Wang  (ICuvg  is  a  better  theorist  than  arithmetician.  The  sqaare  of 
100,000  is  10,000  millions,  not  1  million.  Want)  Ckung  supposes  the  ©arth  to  be 
an  equilateral,  rei-tangular  8<juare. 

3  The  same  mistake.  The  square  of  5,000  is  25  millions.  25  million  square 
Li,  about  8  million  square  kilomeler  is  approximately  the  area  of  the  Eighteen  Pro- 
vincea  or  Cliina  Proper. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Heaven.  257 

plied  by  nine  would  give  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  thousand 
square  Li.  Tsou  Yens  figure 1  may  appear  too  high,  but  computation 
and  a  thorough  investigation  show  us  that,  on  the  contrary,  it  is 
too  low.2 


The  Literati  say  that  heaven  is  air,  and  therefore  not  far  from 
man.  Consequently  it  immediately  knows,  whether  they  are  right 
or  wrong,  aud  whether  they  possess  secret  virtues  or  vices,  and 
also  responds  to  them.  This  is  regarded  as  a  proof  of  its  vicinity. 
But,  if  we  examine  the  question  critically,  we  find  that  heaven's 
body  is  not  air. 

Men  are  created  by  heaven,  why  then  grudge  it  a  body? 
Heaven  is  not  air,  but  has  a  body  on  high  and  far  from  men. 
According  to  private  traditions  lieaven  is  upwards  of  sixty-thousand 
Li  distant  from  the  earth.3  Some  mathematicians  reckon  the  entire 
circumference  of  lieaven  at  365  degrees.  Thus  the  world  all  round 
is  divided  into  degrees,  and  its  height  measures  a  certain  number 
of  Li.  If  heaven  were  really  air,  air  like  clouds  and  mist,  how 
could  then  be  so  many  Li  or  so  many  degrees?  Besides  we  have 
the  "  twenty-eight  constellations,"  which  serve  as  resting-places  to 
sun  and  moon,  just  as  on  earth  the  couriers  lodge  in  postal  stations. 
The  postal  stations  on  earth  correspond  to  the  solar  mansions  on 
lieaven.  Hence  the  statement  found  in  books  that  heaven  has  a 
body  is  not  baseless.  To  him  wlio  considers  the  question,  as  we 
have  done,  it  becomes  evident  that  Leaven  cannot  be  something 
diffuse  and  vague. 


' 225,000  square  Li  (225  millions),  which  number  is  baaed  on  Twu  Yen'n 
hypothesis  that  there  are  nine  continents  as  largo  as  China. 

*  Wang  CKuiig  haa  calculated  a  million  square  Li  (10,0()0  millions).  The 
area  of  our  Earth  measures  about  510  million  square  kilometer,  not  2,5(K)  millions 
10,000  million  square  Li)  as  results  from  Wang  Chung 'x  calculation. 

， Iluai  Kan  Tse  aays  50,000  Li. 


LimHcng. 


Digitized  by  Google 


258  Lun  -  Heng :  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XX. 
On  the  Sun  (Shuo-ji/i). 

The  Literati  say  that  the  sun,  when  he  becomes  visible  in 
tilt;  morning,  comrs  forth  from  darkness,  and  that,  when  he  dis- 
appears in  tlio  evening,  lie  ro-cnters  darkness.  The  Yin  fluid  of 
darkness  is  obscure,  they  say,  therefore  the  sun  disappears  iu  it, 
and  becomes  invisible. 

In  roalil y  the  sun  neither  leaves  nor  rc-cntcrs  <larkness,  but 
liow  can  \vv  prove  that? 

、'iglit  is  darkness ；  its  fluid  is  also  obscuiv. 1  But  if  a  iire  is 
iiiaclc  during;  tho  night,  its  light  is  not  extinguished  by  the  niglit. 
J  ! it'  darkiu'ss  of  niglit  is  the  darkness  of  t he  north.  The  setting 
sun,  whieh  rises  in  ( lie  morniiifj;,  is  the  kindled  fire.  The  light  of 
a  lire,  kindled  at  night-time,  is  not  extinguished,  that  s1io\n  s  tliat, 
when  the  huu  sctss  in  the  evening,  a  iluid-  cauriot.  be  the  cause  of 
his  disappearance. 

Observing  tlie  sun-rise  and  the  sun-set  in  winter,  we  remark 
that,  in  tli，'  morning,  lit'  rises  iu  tlie  south-east,  and,  iu  the  evening, 
he  sets  in  flu*  south-west.  Tlie  south-east  and  the  south -、 vest  are 
not  tlie  r«*j^iou  of  the  Yin  or  darkm*«s.:i  How  then  can  it  be  said 
that  the  sun  proceeds  from  and  reverts  to  darkness?  Furthermore, 
the  stars  liotwitlistanding-  their  isinallness  remain  visible,  and  the 
sun  is  oxtinguisliocl  in  spiti*  of  his  greatness?  The  roasoning  of 
tlie  scliolars  of  to-day  is  tliouglitlcss  ami  shallow. 

They  n<>;aiu  say  that  (hf  sliortnrss  of  the  clays  in  winter,  and 
their  length  in  summer  are  also  brought  about  by  the  Yin  and  tlio 
Yamj.  In  summer,  tlu>  Ynny  lluid  alxumds,  and  tlie  Yin  lluid  falls 
short.  Tlit'  Yau(j  lluid  shim's  with  tlie  same  spk'iulour  as  the  sun. 
Consc([U(Mitly,  wlion  tlie  sun  conies  t'orlli.  tla-rc  is  nothing  to  ob- 
scure him.    In  winter,  the  Yin  fluid  is  dusky,  and  overshadows 


1  Niglit  is  here  taken  as  something  positive,  .somctliing  like  a  black  veil,  or 
dark  air,  not  as  the  absence  of  ligliU  wliieli  docs  not  t  ausc  tin;  disappearance  of  the 
son,  but  is  its  consequence. 

2  The  dark  lluid  of  night. 

3  According  to  Chinese  symbolism  tlie  Yin  principle  of  darkness  corresponds 
to  the  north. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun. 


2f,9 


the  sun-light.  Therefore,  although  the  sun  rises,  lie  remains  dark 
ami  invisible.  Thus  in  winter  the  days  are  short.  The  Yin  in 
paramount,  and  the  Yang  is  scarce,  just  the  reverse  of  what  takes 
place  in  summer. 

However,  if  we  consider  tlic  question  seriously,  we  will  find 
that  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  are  not  responsible  for  the  length  or 
the  shortness  of  the  days.  This  is  made  evident  by  the  northern 
stars.  The  Yin  of  the  north  is  tlie  Yin  of  the  sun.  The  Yin  of 
the  north  does  not  overshadow  the  sparkling  of  tlie  stars,  why 
tlion  should  the  Yin  in  winter  obfuscate  the  brightness  of  the  sun? 
Hence  those  wlio  speak  about  the  Yi"  and  the  Yang  miss  the  truth. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  suiumor  the  sun  stands  in  Gemini,  in 
wintt'r  in  Aquila.1  Aquilu  is  far  from  the  pole,  therefore  the  curve 
ilivscribt'd  by  tlie  sun  in  short.  Gemini  being  near  the  pole,  the 
solar  curve  is  long  then.  In  summer  the  sun  proceeds  northwards 
as  tar  as  t"、iniiii,  in  winter  southwards  as  tar  as  Aquila.  Tlie  re- 
fore  the  extreme  solar  poin ts  in  winter  and  summer  are  called 
" wihter "  and  "  summer  limit."2  Because  in  spring  and  autumn 
those  extremes  arc  not  reached,  one  speaks  of  "vernal"  and 
" autumnal  division."3 

.Some  people  hold  (hat  in  summer,  when  tlie  Yang  fluid 
abounds,  it  is  in  the  south,  and  that  in  consequence  heaven  rises 
and  be<'omes  liii^h.  In  winter  the  Yang  fluid  decays,  and  heaven 
sinlis  down,  and  becomes  depressed.  When  heaven  is  high,  tlie 
course  of*  the  sun  increases  in  length,  antl  the  days  are  lengthened; 
when  I  leave  n  is  low,  the  solar  curve  decreases,  and  the  days  are 
short. 

Now,  if  owing  to  the  exuberanrc  of  the  solar  Yany  fluid, 
liea von  rises  in  the  south,  and  the  course  of  the  sun  is  lengthened, 
the  same  increase  ou^ht  to  lake  place  in  regard  to  the  moon.  In 
summer,  when  the  days  are  long,  tl"'  sun  rises  in  tlie  north-east, 
luit  the  moon  in  the  sour!i-east.  In  winter,  when  the  days  an- 
short,  the  sun  rises  in  the  south-east,  whereas  the  moon  rises  in 
the  iiortli-cast.  U  in  suniuur  heaven  were  raised  in  the  south, 
sun  and  moon  ought  equally  to  rise  in  tho  n«>rth-oa.st,  and,  it'  in 
winter  heaven  wer (；  lowered,  sun  and  moon  should  both  rise  in 
the  south-east.    It  results  from  tliis,  that  in  summer  heaven  does 

' Literally:  l'un9-chw9       井， the  "Eastern  Well,"  and  (  hiett-nu 
the  "  Henlsumn." 

■ '    东 . The  two  solstices. 

1    分. Tlie  two  etjuinoxes. 

17* 


Digitized  by  Google 


2C>0 


Lon-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


not  rise  in  the  south,  and  that  in  winter  it  is  not  depressed.  On 
the  contrary,  in  summer,  when  the  days  an?  long,  the  stars  from 
which  the  sua  rises  are  iu  the  north,  and  in  winter,  when  the 
days  are  short,  these  stars  are  in  the  south. 

The  following  question  may  be  raised.  In  summer,  in  the 
fifth  moon,  when  the  days  are  long,  the  sun  stands  in  Gcmiui, 
which  are  near  the  pole,  therefore  the  course  of  the  sun  is  long. 
Now,  we  see  that  in  the  fifth  moon  the  sun  rises  in  the  sign  Yin 1 
and  sets  iu  IIsll.'2  The  solar  curve  being  so  loug  aud  far  from 
men,  how  is  it  that  we  sec  the  sun  rise  in  Yin  and  set  in  I  hit? 
When  the  sun  stands  iu  Gemini,  he  is  very  near  to  men.  Gemini 
are  near  the  pole,  hence,  when  the  pole  turns  round,  they  ought 
to  remain  always  visible.8  Provided  that  Gemini  are  by  the  side 
of  the  pole,  ought  we  not  to  have  no  night,  but  continuous  (lay?4 

Some,  scholars  assert  that  sun  and  moou  have  nine  different 
courses,  therefore,  they  say,  the  sun  in  his  course  is  near  or  far, 
and  day  and  niglit  are  long  or  short. ― However,  in  the  fifth  month 
day-time  makes  up  and  night-time  5/16,  and  in  the  sixth  month 
tlio  day  is  ,0/16  and  the  night  From  the  sixth  month  to  the 

eleventh  month  every  month  the  day  decreases  by  '/16.  That  means 
that  to  tlie  course  of  the  sun  every  month  、"6  is  added.  In  the 
lapse  of  a  year  the  sun  takes  16  different  courses  ou  heaven  aud 
not  i)  only. 

Another  idea  is  that  heaven  is  high  in  tlic  south  and  depressed 
iu  the  north.  Whcu  the  sun  rises  iuto  the  higher  region,  he  be- 
comes visible,  and  when  he  sets  into  the  lower  one,  he  disappears. 
Heaven  is  believed  to  be  like  a  reclining  umbrella,  wliich  is  shown 
by  tlie  fact  lhat  the  pole,  as  seen  from  us,  is  in  the  nortli.  The 
pole  is  the  centre  of  the  world.  Since  it  is  north  from  us,  heaven 
must  evidfntly  resemble  a  reclining  umbrella. 

If  to  illustrate  the  shining  of  the  sun  tlie  analogy  of  a  reclining 
umbrella  be  used,  heaven  must  really  have  the  shape  of  an  um- 
brella. The  polar  star  in  the  nortli  of  the  upper  part  would  (,or- 
rcspond  (o  the  top  of  tlie  uinbrolla,  the  south  in  the  lower  part 
would  be  like  the  stick  of  the  umbrella,  but  where  would  that 
be?  An  umbrella  reclining  on  the  earth  canuot  turn  round,  but 
raise  it  straight,  and  it  rotates.   Now,  provided  tliat  heaven  revolves, 

1  This  cyclical  sign  denotes  ENEa/4N  on  the  compass  wid  corresponds 
to  Gemini. 

»  Usii  -  WNW'/^N  and  Aquarius. 

3  Turning  round  willi  the  pole. 

4  The  sun  turning  round  tlie  pole  in  Gemini  and  ncvor  disappeiiring. 


Digitized  by 


On  the  Sun. 


2(')1 


its  northern  edge  cannot  touch  the  earth,  for  how  could  it  revolve, 
if  it  knocked  against  the  earth?  We  see  from  this  tliat  heaven 
cannot  be  shapetl  like  a  reclining  umbrella,  and  tliat  the  sun  rising 
or  setting  does  not  follow  the  elevation,  and  the  depression  of 
heaven. 

Some  people  maintain  that  the  northern  edge  of  heaven  sinks 
down  into  the  earth,  and  that  the  sun  follow iug  heaven  enters 
into  the  earth.  The  earth  being  massive,  obscures  him,  so  tliat 
men  cannot  see  liim.  But  heaven  and  earth  arc  husband  and  wife. 
They  unite  in  one  body,  heaven  is  in  earth,  and  earth  joined  to 
heaven.  Their  fluids  mix  and  produce  things.  The  north  is  Yin, 
Wlien  both  are  coupled,  aud  their  fluids  mingle,  it  is  in  tlie  north 
therefore,1  but  does  heaven  revolve  in  the  earth  ？  If  not,  the  earth 
in  the  north  would  be  depressed,2  and  not  evon. 

Let  us  suppose  tliat  heaven  really  is  revolving  in  the  earth. 
On  digging  up  the  eartli  ten  feet  deep  we  find  springs.  Does  then 
heaven  revolving  in  the  eartli  plunge  into  the  water,  and  then 
oo me  out  again?  If  the  north  were  depressed  and  not  level,  the 
Nine  Streams3  ought  to  flow  north  witliout  ever  filling  it  up.  In 
reality  heaven  does  not  revolve  in  the  earth,  nor  does  the  sun 
become  obscured,  because  he  follows  heaven.  Heaven  is  quite  as 
level  as  earth,  and  the  sun  rises,  and  sets,  being  turned  round 
along  with  heaven. 

Heaven  appears  to  us  in  the  shape  of  a  bowl  turned  upside 
down.  Therefore  the  sun  rising  and  setting  looks  like  coining  from 
and  entering  into  the  eartli.  When  the  sun  rises,  lie  is  near,  when 
he  sets,  he  is  far,  and  becomes  invisible,  hence  the  term  setting  or 
entering.  When  in  his  rotation  the  sun  appears  in  the  east,  he  is 
near,  hence  we  say  that  he  is  rising  or  coming  out.  But  what 
proof  have  wc?  If  you  attach  a  moonlight  pearl  to  the  bow  over 
a  cart,  and  turn  the  cart  round,  the  pearl  will  also  turn. 

To  men  heaven  and  earth  seem  to  unite  at  a  distance  of  no 
more  than  ton  Li.  Tliat  is  tlie  effect  of  tlie  distance,  for  they  do 
not  come  together  in  fact.  W hen  we  beluild  the  sun  setting,  he 
does  not  set  eitlier,  it  is  also  the  distarux'.  At  the  time,  when  the 
sun  sets  in  tlie  west,  tl"'  pooplo  living  then*  will  perhaps  say  tliat 
lie  is  culminating,  and  looking  from  tin*  point,  where  the  sun  is 
setting,  eastward  t<»  our  world,  liraven  and  earth  may  appear  to 


The  north  is  Yin,  whicli  is  synonymous  with  female,  here  the  female  organ. 

Vis  by  heaven  knocking  against  it  in  its  rotation. 

Tlio  Nine  Streams  rcgulati-d  by  J'ti.    See  Mat/erf  Pt.  II,  No.  207. 


Digitized  by  Google 


202 


Lun  -  IWng :  C.  Plivsioa). 


the  beholder  joined  together.  Our  world  is  in  the  south, 1  then-fon' 
the  sun  rises  in  tlie  east,  and  disappears  in  the  nortlu'in  rvgions.2 
If  the  sun  rose  in  the  north,  he  would  sot  in  the  soutli,3  for  every- 
where, what  is  near  seems  to  rise,  ami  what  is  far,  to  set.  In  real- 
ity there  is  no  setting;,  but  it  is  tlio  distance. 

If  standius:  on  the  shore  of  a  big  lake,  you  look  out  to  its 
limits  in  tlie  four  directions,  they  are  blended  witli  heaven.  As  a 
matter  of  fart,  they  are  not  blended,  hut  the  distance  gives  this 
impression.  Tlirou»h  distance  the  sun  sct'ins  setting,  and  through 
distance  the  lake  seems  to  1"，  1>1(mh1c(1  with  licav«Mi.  It  is  I  lie  !<aiiio 
in  both  cases.  Tin1  lake  is  horde  red  by  laiul.  but  \\v  do  not  w 
if,  for  to  the  observer  it  looks,  as  if  it  were  blended4  with  hcavi  n. 
The  sun  also  looks  like  settinjr.  All  this  is  lirouplit  about  liy  <listaiicc. 

The  hoi^lit  of  Mount  T  ni  i>((uals  tliat  of  heaven,  and  is  lost 
in  the  clouds,  yet  from  a  distajice  of  one  limxlred  Li  the  mountain 
docs  not  appear  as  big  as  a  clod  of  earth.  At  a  distance  of  our 
hundred  Li  Mount  T  ai  disap[)ears,  ho、v  much  mon«  tlie  sun.  w  liose 
distance  from  us  is  countod  by  ten  thousands  of  Li!  The  exani[)lr 
of  tlie  'r'ai-s/ian  gives  an  explanation. 

Let  a  man  take  a  big  torch,  and  walk  at  nigltt  on  a  level 
road,  where  there  are  no  gaps.  He  will  not  have  walked  (<»  a 
distance  of  one  Li  i'rom  us.  before  the  light  of  tho  fire  is  gone  out.; 
It  does  not  go  out,  it  is  flu'  distance.  In  the  same  manner  tlie  sun 
revolving  westward  and  disapiicaring  docs  not  sot.6 

The  following'  (juestion  may  1"'  asked:— Heaven  is  lovt  l  as 
much  as  the  earth.  Now,  looking  、、p  to  heaven  and  re^a riling  the 
movements  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  it  seems  as  though  heaven 
were  high  in  the  south  and  low  in  the  north.7  How  is  that  to 
be  explained? 

1  See  above  p.  255.  On  p.  2(YA  Wang  <  h  ung  says  that  our  world  lies  in  the 
south-east  of  the  universe. 

•J  The  sun  sc\s  in  the  west  and  jiasscs  tlirough  the  north,  before  lie  rises 
again  in  the  east. 

8  To  people  living  in  the  east  of  tlie  univ*-rs«^  i.  e.  \w\o\\  the  farthest  ea.stern 
limit  reached  by  tlio  wui  in  liis  course,  the  sun  would  appear  to  rise  in  the  north, 
to  culminate  in  the  east,  ajid  to  s<-t  in  th«;  south. 

4  The  context  requires  that  we  «liou!d  read  j^'J  bl>i\<lcd  instead  of  looK- 
out  of  the  text. 

s  The  light  becomes  invisible  for  those  who  look  after  him. 
The  great  distance  makes  the  sun  invisible. 

7  Because  the  sun  and  the  moon,  wliicli  arc  supposed  •  to  be  attached  to 
heaven  aud  revolving  willi  it,  rise  on  th«  southern  hemisphere,  and  go  down  on 
the  northeru. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun. 


2fi3 


The  answer  is  this: ― Our  actual  world  1  is  lying  in  the  soulh- 
viiHt.  Seen  from  Ix'low,  heaven  looks,  as  if  it  、vi'n'  rlcvateil.  and 
tlie  oonrsos  of  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  soutli  of  us.  Now,  our 
world  Ik's  h»*nt»arli  the  courses  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  tlim'clW 
it  seems  to  us,  as  if  in  tlu-ir  motions  they  rose  in  the  soutli,  and 
(loscemled  in  the  nortli.    How  shall  we  account  for  tbat? 

If  heaven  were  elevated  in  tlie  south,  the  southern  stars  sliouhl 
be  elevated  likewise.  However,  we  see  them  j^oing  down.  Is  tiicii 
heaven  again  depresst'd  in  the  south ？  Tlie  celestial  bodies  which 
an*  near  appear  lu'gli,  those  which  are  distant,  low.  To  jx'ople 
north  of  tl"'  pole  ir  seems  hi^li,  and  tlie  south  t\wy  regard  a.s 
low.    Thf  same  holds  lor  the  regions  ea.st  and  u est  of  tl"' 

pol»\  All  regard  as  liigli,  what  is  near,  and  sw  low,  what  is  far 
from  them. 

II*'  who  from  hcneatli  tlio  Noriltrn  /V/ax.v-  looks  up,  sers  tlie 
polar  coiistcllatioii  al"»v,、  liiui.  The  uortli  of  tlie  //.、' /"/《/-" «  is  the 
border-laiul  of  tl"'  ourtli.  Scon  in  the  imrdi,  heaven  still  appears 
high  in  tl"'  north  and  low  in  tlie  south,  and  sun  and  moon  in 
their  courses  ascend  heaven  tin* re  also.  For  a  man  standinp;  on 
Mount  T'ai  it  is  lii^li,  wht'rea.s  ten  Li  from  its  loot  it  appears  low. 
The  heiglit  of  lieavcn  is  like  tliat  of  Mount  T  ai  as  seen  by  men. 

The  four  quarters  and  the  (！ entn%  whicli  aro  level,  are  of  tli<» 
same  height,  if,  tlierofore,  lioaven  scorns  to  he 山、 pir>ssi、<l  at  tlit*  four 
cardinal  points,  this  must  be  an  illusion  ranM'd  by  the  distance. 
Heaven  does  not  only  srem  dejiresspd  then',  hut  joim-il  to  the  e;irth. 

Some  savants  hold  that  at  sunrise  and  Hiinsct,  in  the  niorniiig 
and  in  the  cveninj;,  tl"'  sun  is  near,  and  that  while  in  the  zcivitli 
lie  is  far  away.  <  onvorsely.  otlicrs  inaiiitaiu  that  thr  sun  in  tho 
/.enitli  is  near,  whrreas  at  sunrise  and  suiiset  1"'  is  a  long  way 
ort'.  Those  who  l"'liw>  tlint  tlio  sun  is  nt'ar.  、vl"'n  ho  rises  or  sets, 
and  far  oil",  wlien  In1  fulminates,  have  rotnjirkod  tlio  large  size  of 
tlie  sun  rising  i,r  setting,  and  his  smallm'ss  at  ikioii.  We  And  that 
things  are  large,  when  tliey  arc  near  us,  and  small,  when  sren  from 
a  distance.  TlierHorv  the  rising  and  srltin^  sun  is  considered  to 
be  near,  and  tin*  suti  in  tl"'  zenith  to  ho  lar  distaut.  LMiose  who 
bolieve  that  at  sunrise  and  simsrl  t lu*  sun  is  far  and  at  noon 
near  us.  have  ou  the  other  hand  inado  tl"'  <>l>servati<m  that  at  uoon 
thv  s\u\  is  warm,  and  that  li《、  is  cool,  \vhilt»  rising  or  setting.  Wlicn 
a  fire  comes  near  us.  w c  (Vel  hot.  "Iim'as,  wIkmi  it  is  at  a  distance, 

1   /•  r.  China, 
- In  Mongolia. 


Digitized  by  Google 


26i 


Lun-Wng:  C.  Physical. 


we  feel  cold.  Hence  the  idea  that  the  sun  at  noon  is  near,  while 
he  is  at  a  distance,  wlien  he  is  rising  or  setting. 1 

Both  views  are  well-founded,  and  it  has  not  yet  been  ascer- 
tained, which  is  right,  and  whicli  is  wrong.  If  we  consider  the 
question  seriously,  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the  sun  in  the 
zenith  is  near,  and  at  sunrise  and  sunset  far  off,  as  the  following 
experiment  will  show.  Place  a  pole  upright  in  a  room.  The  room 
is  30  feet  higli.  The  pole  placed  vertically  under  the  roof-beam 
knocks  against  the  latter  above,  and  reaches  to  the  bottom  below. 
The  beam  then  is  30  feet  distant  from  the  bottom.  When  the  pole 
is  inclined  a  little  sidewards,  its  top  diverges  sidewards,  and  cannot 
touch  the  beam  anymore,  because  the  distance  from  the  bottom  is 
more  than  30  feet. 

When  the  sun  is  culminating,  he  just  readies  the  highest 
point  on  heaven,  exactly  like  the  pole  standing  upright  so,  that 
the  distance  from  tlie  bottom  measures  30  feet.  The  sun  rising  or 
setting  is  deflected  to  our  right  or  left  like  the  pole  inclining  to 
one  side,  whereby  the  distance  from  the  bottom  exceeds  30  feet. 
We  learn  from  this  that  the  sun  in  the  zenith  is  near,  ami  the 
rising  or  setting  sun  more  distant. 

Let  again  a  man  be  seated  in  the  central  hall  of  a  house, 
and  another  walk  on  its  roof.  When  he  has  readied  the  centre 
of  the  house,  he  is  just  above  the  man  seated,  and  the  distance 
from  the  mau  on  the  roof  to  the  man  sitting  in  the  house,  is 
30  feet.  When  lie  is  at  the  eastern  or  the  western  corner  of  the 
roof,  his  distance  from  the  man  in  the  house  is  greater  than  30  feet. 

The  sun  in  the  zenith  is  like  the  man  standing  in  the  middle 
of  the  roof,  when  the  sun  is  just  rising  or  setting,  he  resembles 
the  man  at  the  eastern  or  western  comer.  The  sun  in  the  zenith 
is  near  us,  therefore  warm,  at  the  time  of  his  rising;  or  setting,  he 
is  far,  and  consequently  cool.  However,  when  the  sun  stands  ia 
tlie  zenith,  he  is  small,  whereas  at  sunrise  and  sunset  he  is  large. 
That  is  because,  when  the  sun  is  culminating,  the  brightness  of 
daylight 2  makes  him  appear  small,  and  wlien  the  sun  is  rising  or 
setting,  daylight  is  fading,  and  lie  looks  larger  in  consequence.  In 
the  same  manner  a  fire  looks  small  at  clay-time,  but  big  at  night. 
What  is  shown  by  fire,  can  be  proved  by  the  stars  also.  The  stare 

1  This  problem  is  already  enunciated  by  Dch  Tse  V,  9  who  makes  two  lads 
expose  it  to  Confucius.  They  ask  the  Sage  to  decide  between  the  two  antagonistic 
views,  but  lie  is  unable  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply. 

2  Wang  Ch'ung  seems  to  think  that  daylight  is  distinct  from  the  light  of 
the  sun. 


On  the  Sun. 


are  not  visible  during  the  day,  because  the  brightness  of  the  day 
eclipses  them.  At  niglit  there  is  no  light,  and  the  stars  become 
visible.  Now  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  stars.  Wlien  the  sun  ap- 
proaches the  horizon,  and  is  about  to  set,  his  light  fades,  and  he 
appears  bigger. 

The  scholars  argue  that  in  the  morning  the  sun  rises  from 
Fu  Sang,1  and  in  the  evening  sets  in  Hsi  Liu.3  Fu  Sang  is  the 
eastern  region,  Hsi  Liu  the  western  desert,  both  are  tlie  confines 
of  heaven  and  earth,  and  the  places  wliere  the  sun  aud  the  moon 
use  to  rise  and  set. 

I  beg  to  put  the  following  question  ： ― Every  year  in  the  se- 
cond and  tlie  eighth  months  tlie  sun  rises  exactly  in  the  east,  and 
sets  exactly  in  the  west.8  We  might  say  then  that  the  suu  rises 
in  Fu  Sang,  and  sets  in  list  Liu.  But  in  summer,  wlien  the  days 
are  long,  tlie  sun  rises  in  tlie  north-east,  and  sets  in  the  north- 
west.4 In  winter,  when  the  days  are  short,  the  sun  rises  in  the 
south-east  and  sets  in  the  south-west.  In  winter  and  summer  rising 
and  setting  take  place  in  four  different  corners.  In  which  place 
exactly  are  Fu  Sony  and  I  hi  Liu  situated  then?  The  above  state- 
ment, therefore,  is  true  for  spring  and  autumn,  but  not  for  winter 
and  summer.  Yet,  after  all,  tlie  sun  does  uot  rise  in  Fu  Sa"g  nor 
set  in  1M  Liu  for  the  reason  that  he  revolves  with  heaven  and  is 
visible,  when  near,  and  invisible,  wlien  far  oiX.  While  lie  is  in 
Fu  Sang  or  ITsi  Liu,  the  people  there,  from  their  standpoint,  will 
say  that  the  sun  is  in  the  zenith.  At  other  times  it  may  appear 
from  Fu  Sang  and  Ihi  Liu,  as  though  the  sun  wore  rising  or  set- 
ting. When  he  is  above  people's  heads,  they  call  it  noon,  when 
he  is  on  one  side,  tlicy  call  it  morning  or  evening!  How  can  the 
sun  under  these  circumstances  rise  in  Fu  Sang,  and  set  in  Hsi  Liu? 

The  Literati  again  assert  that  lieaven  is  revolving  from  right 
to  left,5  and  that  the  sun  and  the  moon  in  their  courses  are  not 
attached  to  heaven,  but  have  each  their  own  movemcut.  It  might 
be  objected  that,  in  case  the  suu  and  the  moon  had  tlioir  proper 
movements,  and  were  not  attached  to  heaven,  tlie  sun  would  proceed 
one  degree,  and  the  moon  tliirtccn.  After  their  rise,  bolli  ought 
to  go  on  and  turn  from  west  to  east,  how  is  it  that  nevertheless 

1  Fu  Sang  has  been  identified  with  Sakhalin. 
， Hsi  Liu  must  be  the  Mongolian  Desert. 
3  At  the  equinoxes.    See  above  p.  258. 
*  Vid.  ' above  p.  250. 

5  From  right  to  left,  facing  tlie  polar  star  which  remains  motionless  and  round 
which  heaven  revolver  from  east  to  west  (cf.  p.  267). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Lun-Hong:  C.  Pl.ysiral. 

thoy  commoncc  to  turn  westward?  Tlioy  are  attached  to  heaven, 
and  follow  its  movcnients  during  t\ui  four  seasons.  Their  movement 
may  be  compared  to  that  of  unts  rrawling  on  a  rolling  mill-stone. 
The  inovemonts  of  the  sun  and  tin*  moon  are  slow,  whereas  heaven 
moves  very  fast.  Ilcax  en  carries  t  he  sun  and  the  moon  along;  with 
it,  therefore  tliey  really  move  eastward,1  but  are  turned  westward. 


IN-rhaps  the  following  question  might  be  raised:  — TIk-  sun. 
t\u\  moon,  and  heaven  liave  tlieir  movement  each,  huf  the  nu tuber 
of  dco-roes  which  rlu*y  traverse  is  not  the  same.  To  wliat  can  their 
velocity  be  (compared,  if  referrt'd  to  the  things  ("•  tliis  world? 

I  would  reply  tliat  heaven  makes  one  oiirumvolution  every 
day.  Tlie  sun  moves  on  ono 山' gm>  (Mpial  to  2.000  Li.  of  which 
lie  makes  1,000  durinp;  I  ho  da  v-timr'  and  1,000  (luring  tlie  night. 
The  imicoi'u2  also  runs  1 ,000  Li  during  tlie  day,  therefore  tin* 
sjk'ciI  of  the  sun  is  vorv  much  like  tlie  pace  of  tlie  unicorn. 

Tlie  moon  moves  on  13  (heroes.  10  degrees  being  equal  to 
20,000  Li,  an<l  3  degrees  to  6.000.  tho  (listam','  made  by  tlie  moon 
in  one  day  and  one  niirlit  is  26.000  T.i,  which  is  like  the  flight  of 
n  wild  duck. 

Since  heaven  turns  round  Htlf)  degrees,  tlie  multiplication  gives 
730,(100  Li.  This  movom«'nt  is  very  fast,  and  there  is  nothing  like 
it.  It  can  be  compared  to  thr  rolation  of  a  potter's  wheel  or  the 
sjiced  of  an  arrow,  sliot  from  i\  cross-bow. 

IJut  altluuigh  tlie  rotation  of  lioavon  be  so  vrry  fast,  it  ap- 
pears t<»  us  slow,  bcM-ausc  lieavrn  is  so  lii^rh.  aud  Car  away,  for 
distant  objects  in  motion  look  mol ionlcss,  ami  things  shifliiifj;  tlieir 
place,  stationary,  as  (In*  iollowinii'  observation  will  show.  If  any 
body  is  on  board  a  shij>,  sailinii  \\  illi  tho  wind,  in  a  river  or  on 
sea ,  I""'  spt'od  is  [""si,  wliilr  she  is  near  the  shore,  and  sl<— >、v,  while 
slie  is  far  oiT.  Tli''  ship's  real  speed  ivmains  the  snmo,  hn  quick- 
ness or  slowness  mcn-lv  (Ij-pendin^  nn  rhc  distance  from  which  she 
is  so«M). 

W lion        look  u|)  to        en.  its  iiiovcmcnt  tlocs  not  appear 
(juit  K  us  that  <if  tlie  unironi.    With  the  sun  over  i(  the  iinn-orn 
liaslcns  mi.  bill  u  lien  darkness  falls,  the  sun  is  in  front,  why  ? 

1    I'tirir  own  ini.vonx'iit  beint;  from  west  to  ca.st,  opposite  to  that  of  heaven. 

- The  hi liii,  Uy  KiirojK'jiiis  usually  unicorn,  whose  protoWpe  seems  to 

liave  hccn  the  tjiraHV.  TUr  ！; inifTf  gallops  lil^e  die  CiisKvst  horse.  Tlie  swiflest  horses 
arc  lil、t'、、'i 化 said  to  innkc        >i\  Li  a  day. 


itized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun. 


207 


Bpcause  the  imioorn  is  near,  whereas  rlie  sun  is  far.  I)i.stan<-c 
conveys  the  im|>r('ssi(、ii  of  slowness,  and  pr 。-、 imity  that  of  speed. 
If  a  journv  oxtriuls  ovrr  00,000  I  J.  it  is  (磁 nilt  t(,  form  an  ade- 
quate idea  of  tlie  real  nu)vcin»int. 


The  Literati  assert  that  tin*  sun  moves  one  (le^ree,  and  heavon 
365  (luring  one  day  and  one  niglit,  tliat  heaven  turns  to  the  left, 
and  the  sii，i  and  the  moon  to  tlu»  ri^hl,  und  that  thry  "，'','/  lieavrn. 

The  following  (|uesti(m  may  b(，  askod :— l  lie  movements  of 
tin*  sun  and  the  moon  (l，'pi'n(l  on  heaven,  tlicy  move,  attached  to 
heaven,  not  straight  on.  How  shall  \\ c  describe  it?  The  Yikiurj 
says ： ― "The  sun,  tlir  moon,  and  the  stars  rely  on  heaven.  Fruits, 
grasses,  and  troes  rely  on  earth."  1  Kclving  means  tliat  they  are 
attaclit'd.  Tlie  iiiovcmtMit  att.iclit'd  to  heaven  is  like  that  of  men 
walking  round  on  tlie  earth.  Tho  simile  is  like  tliat  of  the  ants 
crawling  on  tlie  rolling  mill-stone. 


Tliere  is  the  (juestion: ― Flow  do  、、','  know  that  t)ie  sun  does 
not  detach  himseir  from  lioaven,  nor  move  straight  <m  independently? 
It*  the  sun  rouM  <lo  so,  lie  ought  to  turn  eastward  of  himself,  and 
not  share  licavni's  movement  to  the  wc^t.  The  niovemeiit  of  the 
moon  is  the  sanu*  as  tliat  of  tlir  sun.  both  being  attached  to  heaven. 
This  is  proved  by  a  romparison  with  th<«  cloiuls. 

Tlie  cloiuls  aro  not  attaclied  to  heavon,  tliey  always  remain 
in  tlieir  placv.  Provided  tlie  sun  an<l  tin;  moon  wore  not  attached 
to  heaven,  wv  would  expect  tlioin  to  keep  their  |)laces  likewise. 
From  this  it  is  evident  that'  tl"、  sun's  movement  is  conuected  willi 
tliat  of  lieaven. 

Another  question  arises: ― The  sun  is  fire.  On  eartlt  fire  does 
not  move,  wliy  thou  docs  tlio  sun  move  on  lieaven? 

The  fluid  atta«*li«Ml  to  lie;ivt'n  has  motion,  tliat  attaclied  to 
the  earth  has  not.  It"  fiiv  be  attached  to  tlie  earth,  tl"、  earth  does 
not  mov,、  <,onse(|iuMitlv  tli"  lire  does  not  move  t'itl""'. 

iSome  one  might  object,  how  could  water  mo、'i、.  if  the  fluid 
attached  to  earth  had  no  motion.    The  reply  is  that  tlie  water 


1  Yiking,  30th  diagram  (Li),  L'ygr' 、  transl.  p.  237. ― Our  text  slightly  differs. 
It  adds  "  and  the  stars,'-  and  writes  "  fruits  "  iustcad  of  "  grains." 


Digitized  by  Google 


1-un-Heiig:  C.  Physiral. 


flows  eastward  into  tlie  ocean,  because  the  north-western  region  is 
high,  and  the  south-eastern  low.  It  is  the  nature  of  water  to  seek 
the  low  places,  whereas  fire  will  rise.  If  the  earth  were  not  high 
in  the  west,  tlie  water  would  not  run  eastward  either. 

We.  will  liave  to  meet  another  objection  as  to  how  men,  being 
attached  to  the  earth,  can  move,  if  the  fluid  attached  to  the  earth 
is  motionless. 

Human  actions  and  desires  all  have  an  aim.  Since  purpose 
is  at  the  root  of  human  nature,  man  works  and  strives. 

The  ancients  were  plain  and  simple-minded.  Though  on  the 
frontier  of  a  neighbouring  country  tliey  heard  the  cocks  crow  and 
the  dogs  bark,  they  never  had  any  intercourse  with  that  country. 

Somebody  will  ask  perhaps,  why  the  stars  do  not  move,  if 
the  fluid  attached  to  heaven  is  in  motion.  I  reply  that  the  stars 
are  fixed  in  heaven.  Heaven  moves,  and  since  they  are  turned 
round  along  with  lieaven,  tliey  move  also. 

An  opponent  might  urge  that  human  nature  is  based  on  pur- 
pose, and  therefore  acts,  but  how  could  heaven  move,  since  its 
principle  is  absenco  of  purpose? ― Heaven's  movement  consists  in 
the  spontaneous  emission  of  fluid.  The  fluid  being  emitted,  tilings 
are  produced  of  themselvos,  but  the  fluid  is  not  emitted  on  pur- 
pose, in  order  to  produce  things.  Without  movement  the  fluid  can- 
not be  emitted,  and  unless  the  fluid  be  emitted,  things  cannot  be 
created.  It  is  difTcrent  from  the  movement  of  wan.  The  move- 
ments of  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  live  planets  all  consist  in  the 
emission  of  fluid. 


The  Literati  hold  that  there  is  a  three-legged  raven  in  the  sun, 
and  a  hare  and  a  toad  in  the  moon.  However,  tlie  sun  is  the 
lieavenly  fire  wliirli  (U>rs  not  diller  from  the  lire  on  earth.  In  the 
fire  on  eartli  tlh'rt'  arc  no  living  boings,  how  could  there  be  a  raven 
in  tlie  heavenly  I'm'?  TUvrv  are  no  living  creatures  in  the  fire, 
whoa  tliey  enter  it.  they  arc  burnt  to  death.  How  could  a  raven 
rfinain  unseat Ium I  ?  . 

The  moon  is  water.1  There  are  living  bcinps  iu  the  water, 
but  not  liaivs  or  toads.  Wlien  ;i  hare  or  a  toad  remain  long  in 
the  \vat<  r,  t Ucy  inevitably  die.  Tlie  sun  and  tlio  moon  are  attached 
to  lieav.'n  jus  I  as  shells  and  oysters  swim  in  the  (Iwp,  evidently 

1  Again  the  misleading  symbolism.  The  moon  represents  the  female  prin- 
ciple, }''■',，  to  whirli  wator  corresponds,  whence  the  naive  deduction  is  made  that 
the  moon  "  water. 


igitized  by  Google 


On  ihe  Sun. 


269 


because  they  belong  to  the  same  fluid.  Are  perhaps  that  what  \vc 
call  a  hare  and  a  toad,  shells  or  oysters? 

And  let  us  ask  the  Literati  whether  the  raven,  the  hare,  and 
the  toad  are  living  or  dead.  If  they  be  dead,  and  remain  for  a 
long  time  in  the  sun  and  the  moon,  tliey  must  become  charred, 
decay  and  putrefy.  If  they  be  alive,  where  are  they  at  the  time 
of  a  total  eclipse  of  the  sun  or,  when  on  the  last  day  of  a  month 
the  moon  totally  disappears? 

The  raven,  the  liare,  and  the  toad  must  be  the  fluid  of  the 
sun  and  the  moon,  as  the  intestines  of  man,  or  the  lu-art,  and  back- 
bone of  animals  are  the  fluid  of  these  creatures.  It  is  still  possible 
to  examine  the  moon,  but,  when  we  look  at  the  sun,  our  eyes  arc 
dazzled,  and  we  cannot  make  out  wliat  fluid  really  pervades  the 
sun,  yet  we  should  be  able  to  distinguish  an  object  in  the  sun, 
and  call  it  a  raven ？  In  fact,  we  cannot  see  the  entire  body  of  a 
raven,  and  we  should  remark  that  it  has  three  legs?  This  is  cer- 
tainly Dot  true. 

Moreover,  、ve  hear  the  Literati  speak  of  many  animals,  why 
then  is  there  only  one  raven  in  tbo  sun,  and  one  hare  and  a  toad 
in  the  moon? 

The  savants  maintain  that  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  is  caused 
by  the  moon.  They  have  observed  that  the  eclipses  of  tlie  sun 
always  fall  on  the  last  and  the  first  day  of  a  month.  At  that 
time  the  moon  is  united  with  the  sun,  therefore  she  must  t'clipsc 
him,  they  think.  Many  eclipses  of  the  sun  liavc  occur  roil  during 
the  "  Spring  and  Autumn "  period.  The  Classic  records  that  on 
the  first  day  of  such  and  sucli  a  moon  the  sun  has  been  ecli])setl, 
but  it  does  not  folloAv  tliat  tlic  moon  has  any  thing  to  do  with 
these  eclipses.  If  the  chroniclers  had  known  that  the  sun  was 
eclipsed  by  tlie  moon,  why  have  they  been  silent  on  this  point, 
and  did  not  speak  of  the  moon  ？ 

They  say  that,  when  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  takes  place,  tlie 
Yang  ia  weak  and  tlie  Yin  strong.  When  a  man  possesses  great 
strength,  lie  can  subdtie  others  in  tliis  world.  Now,  on  the  last 
day  of  a  month,  the  light  of  tlie  moon  is  extinguished,  aud,  on 
the  firat  day  of  tlie  new  moon,  it  is  gono  so  to  say,  whicli  is  the 
highest  degree  of  weakness.  How  could  it  vanqtiixli  the  sun.  for 
the  eclipse  of  the  sun  is  said  to  be  caus«*(l  by  the  moon?  If,  iu 
an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  the  moon  is  believed  to  eclipse  it,  wlierc  is 
the  moon ？  The  eclipse  is  not  caused  by  tlie  moon,  since  the  moon 
herself  is  destroyed.  If  we  regard  tlie  sun  from  the  same  point 
ol'  view  as  the  moon,  his  ligl"  at  an  i-rlipst-  is  drstroyed  of  itseli'. 


Digitized  by  Google 


270 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


On  an  average,  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  occurs  every  41  or  42 
months,  and  an  eclipse  of  tlie  moon,  every  180  days.  These  eclipses 
have  tlieir  fixed  time,  and  tlu'se  oliangcs  do  not  always  take  plart*. 
When  they  liapptMi,  it  is  through  the  spontaneous  action  of  the 
lluid.  Tlie  last  and  tlie  first  day  of  a  month  rrrur  very  often,  but 
does  tlio  moon  t^auso  an  eclipse  tlion?  Lhe  sun  bcin»  in  his  full, 
the  change  is  brought  about  by  liis  shrinking  toother.  Must  we 
sup[)os<'  soinelhing  tliat  i-onsuines  (eclipses)  the  sun?  What  con- 
sumes the  mountains  or  the  t-artli,  when  the  mountains  collapse 
and  tlie  earth  shakes? 

Some  say  that,  、vl"、"  (he  sun  is  oclipsod,  the  moon  covers 
liim.  The  sun  l"'i，ig  above,  the  moon  below,  lier  shadow  falls  on 
tlir  sun's  body.  Wlicn  tlie  sun  and  the  moon  ； ire  united,  but  tlie 
moon  is  above,  and  tlie  .sun  below.  tli'，  moon  cannot  cover  the 
sun,  wlicreas,  when  tho  sun  is  above,  and  tlie  moon  underneath 
liim,  slio  t-asts  licr  sliadnw  on  liim.  The  light  of  the  moon  tliou 
covers  tlie  li^ht  ol"  1:1"'  sun,  Uciwv  the  ex|HTssion :  — eclijjse. 1  Tlie 
shadow  nf  ，l"'  moon  is  like  tliat  of  tlie  clouds  u  liioh  ('over  tlie 
sky  in  such  :i  way  that  I  lie  sun  and  the  moon  arc  invisible. 

Provided  that  both  unite  witli  their  extremities,  they  must 
i'cl ipse  one  anothrr,  and  if  borli,  when  t Uey  comt'  togctlier,  are 
joined  like  two  pitrcs  liding  one  into  tlie  otlier,  the  sun  must  dis- 
appear as  a  inattfr  ol'  i.mirsc.  Tliat  tlie  sua  and  tho  moon  meet 
on  the  last  and  the  first  day  of  tlie  montli  is  a  very  conunon  ce- 
lestial pliciionn'iuni,  but  it  is  wron<^  to  say  that  at  an  eclipse  the 
moon  covers  the  light  of  tl"、  sun  for  tlie  following  reason ： ― 

In  case  that,  when  tlu*  ！ si  in  and  tlie  moon  unite,  the  moon 
covers  (lie  light  of  t  he  sun,  the  edges  of  the  two  luminaries  must  fall 
to^ctluT  at  the  bi'^innin^-  of  tlie  ecli|)st',  an<l  they  must  cliange 
tlicir  places,  when  tlie  sun  conies  out  again.  Now,  let  us  su|)pose 
that  tlu*  sun  stands  in  tin*  cast,  the  m<)("i  in  tlie  west.  Tl"'  moon 
moves  (jiiicklv  eastward,  \\  here  she  (alls  in  witli  tlie  sun.  She 
(:ov,'rs  tlu*  edge  the  sun,  ;ni(l  a  it  or  a  short  time  she  passes  the 
sun  ami  proceeds  cast\\ ;«nl.  The  woh'm  (nlge  of  tlie  sun  has 
bci'ii  covered  lirst.  its  light  must  tla*n  come  back.  'Die  eastrrn 
edge  has  not  yet  been  ovcrsliadowcd,  it   will   be  eclipsed  m'xt. 


1  'J'he  Chinese  expre"""  is  u  to  rotisunic,"  4t  to  eat ''  or 触》   In  the 

popular  belief  the  sum  at  an  crli|ise  is  lieing  devoured  by  tlie  '•  heavenly  dog,"  an 
idea  perhaps  dei  iviMl  Irotii  India  In  \\  ang  ('h'、'i"f'、  time  it  must  not  yet  have  been 
current,  for  otherwise  lie  would  most  likely  not  have  omitted  to  meution  and  con- 
trovert it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun. 


27  \ 


Thus  we  see  that  during  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  the  light  of  the 
western  edge  is  extinguished,  and  that,  when  the  sun  comes  back, 
the  light  of  the  western  returns.    TIjoii  the  niooti  goes  on, 

aud  covers  the  eastern  t'dge,  while  the  wi'stcrn  t'tlgt'  re l urns,  ('an 
we  say  then  that  tlic  sun  and  the  moon  are  jointnl  together,  and 
that  oiu*  covers  and  overshadows  the  other?' 

The  scholars  assert  that  tlic  shape  ol'  tho  sun  and  the  moon 
is  quite  round.  When  tlniy  look  u{>  to  tlit'ni,  tlioy  appear' shaped 
like  a  peck,  or  a  round  basket.  Their  sha|)«'  is  a  regular  circle, 
tlicy  are  not  like  the  fluid  of  a  tirt-  seen  iVoni  ai'ar,  for  a  fluid  is 
not  round.  — In  rrality  the  sun  and  tlic  inoon  are  not  round,  they 
only  appear  so  through  the  distance,  as  will  be  seen  from  tlie 
following:  -Tlic  sun  is  tin*  csscin'r  of  fire,  tlic  moon  tlic  I'sscnco 
of  water.  On  earth  five  and  water  a  re  not  round,  wliy  should 
they  be  round  in  heaven  alone?  The  sun  and  tin*  inoon  in  hoavon 
are  like  tlie  Five  Planets,  and  the  Five  IManets  like  tlie  other  stars. 
The  stars  are  not  round,  only  tlu'ir  radiaru'e  a[)j»ears  round,  be- 
cause they  an*  so  far  Iroin  us.  This  will  becouio  evident  l'rom  tin* 
following  fact ： 一 During-  tlio  "  Spriii.y  Autiunn  "  period  stars 

fell  down  in  the  capital  of  Suny.-  Wlicn  pi、ople  went  near  to 
examine  tliein,  they  found  tliat  they  were  stojies,  but  not  round. 
Since  tlie  stars  are  not  romul,  \vv  know  that  \\w  sun,  the  moou, 
and  the  planets  are  not  rouud  either. 


The  scholars  discoursing  on  the  sun,  and  the  meclianics  liold 
that  there  is  only  one  sun,  wlicn-as  in  the  "  Tt'H'ute  of  Yii  "  and  in 
the  Shan-hai-king  it  is  stated  that  tlierc  arc  ten  suns.  Beyond  the 
ocean  in  tlic  east  there  is  tlic  "  Hot  Water  Abyss." :!  over  wliicli 
rises  Fu-mng.  Tl"'  ten  suns  Imtlit'  in  the  water.  Tline  is  a  huge 
tree.  Nine  amis  remain  in  its  lower  brandies,  while  one  sun  .stays 
on  tlie  upper  brancli.4  Hunt  \an  7k'  also  writes  in  his  book 
about  It'll  suns  which  were  sliiiiiii<r.  During  tlu-  time  of  Ynn  the 
ten  suns  came  out  to^fther,  ami  scorched  overythitig,  wliercupon 

1  Wanr/  (  hung  lierc  speaks  of  a  partial  eclipse.  That  the  sliadow  of  tlie 
moon  in  most  rases  covers  oulyt  part  of  llie  >un  camiot  invalidate  the  right  view, 
wliicli"  Wang  t'liuny  rcjecLs  on  uiisul'ficiciit  i,'i  (Hiiids. 

' CKun-chixi,  Duke  //-.  lOth  year  、L'，,  Classic  Vol.  V.  Pi.  I,  p.  170). 

3  T' "！乂 "k'，. 

4  Sfuin-hfti-kinp  chap.  9,  p.  "•• 


272 


Lun-H*ng:  C.  Physical. 


Yao  shot  at  them.1  Hence  they  never  were  seen  together  any 
more  on  the.  same  day.2 

Commonly  the  "  celestial  stems  " 3  are  called  aims.  From  the 
first  to  the  last  stem  there  are  ten  suns.  There  are  ten  suns,  as 
there  are  five  planets.  Intelligent  people  and  disputing  scholars 
are  at  a  loss,  how  to  find  out  the  truth,  and  do  not  wish  to 
decide  in  favour  of  either  opinion.  Thus  the  two  antagonistic 
statements  are  transmitted  without  criticism,  and  neither  of  the 
two  opinions  meets  with  general  approval.  Yet,  if  we  examine 
tl»e  question  thoroughly,  there  are  not  ten  suns. 

The  suu  is  like  tlie  moon.  If  there  be  ten  suns,  are  there 
twelve  moons?  There  art*  five  planets,  but  the  five  elements: 4  ― 
metal,  wood,  water,  lire,  and  earth  all  burn  with  a  different  light. 
Should  there  be  teu  suns,  their  fluids  ought  to  be  different.  Now, 
we  do  not  discover  any  cliflerenco  in  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  we 
find  that  his  size  is  the  same  at  tlifleient  times.  It*  there  were 
really  different  fluids,  the  light  would  certainly  be  different.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  fluid  is  identical,  it  must  be  united  into 
one  sun,  and  there  cannot  be  ten.  - 

We  see  that  with  a  sun-glass  fire  is  drawn  from  heaveu,  the 
sun  being  a  big  lire.  Since  on  earth  fire  is  one  fluid,  and  the  earth 
lias  not  ten  fires,  how  can  heaven  possess  ten  suns?  Perhaps  the 
so  called  ten  suns  are  some  other  things,  whose  light  and  shape 
n-sembles  that  of  the  suu.  They  are  staying  iu  tlie  "  Hot  Water 
Abyss,"  and  always  climb  up  Fu-satig.  Yil  aud  Yis  saw  them, 
and  described  them  as  ten  suns. 

Some  people  have  measured  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  cal- 
culated Itis  size.  They  lound  tl"'  diameter  to  be  1,000  Li  long. 
Provided  that  tlie  rising  suu  is  the  sun  on  the  Fu-sang  tree,  this 
tree  must  overhang  1 0,000  Li  to  cover  the  sun,  for  the  diameter 
of  one  sun  boing-  1,000  Li,  ten  suns  will  require  10,000  Li. 

【It'av('n  is  more  thau  10,000  Li  distant  from  us. 

W  hen  we  look  up  at  the  suu,  his  brilliancy  is  so  dazzliug, 
and  his  glare  so  bright,  that  it  becomes  unbearable.   If  the  rising 

1  According  to  other  accounts  Yao  ordered  his  minister  a  famous  archer, 
to  shoot  at  the  suns,  of  which  lie  destroyed  nine. 

， The  appearance  of  ten  suns  is  mentioned  in  many  ancient  works :— in 
Chuang  7%«，  the  Li-mo,  the  "  Bamboo  AnnaU,"  the  Tao-chuan,  etc 

3  Tlie  teu  cyclical  signs. 

4  The  five  elements  are  considered  to  be  the  .substances  of  the  Five  Planeta, 
which  have  been  named  after  them:-  Metal  StAr  (Venus),  Wood  Star  (Jupiter),  etc. 

5  Cf.  p.  330. 


On  the  Sun.  273 

sun  was  the  sun  from  the  Fu-sang  tree,  Yil  and  Yi  would  not  have 
been  able  to  recognise  him  as  the  sun.  A  look  at  one  sun  would 
have  sufficed  to  dazzle  the  eyea,  how  much  more  so,  if  there  were 
ten  suns.  When  Ya  and  Yi  saw  the  suns,  they  appeared  to  them 
like  pecks  and  round  baskets,  therefore  they  called  them  suns. 
The  fires  looked  like  pecks  and  baskets,  but  an  object  seen  at  a 
distance  of  60,000  Li  appears  different  from  oue  looked  at  and 
examined  quite  near.  Consequently  wliat  Yil  and  Yi  saw  tliey  took 
for  suns,  but  were  not  suns. 

Among  the  things  of  heaven  and  earth  many  resemble  one 
auother  in  substance,  yet  they  are  not  the  same  in  fact.  Beyond 
the  oceau  in  the  south-west  there  is  a  pearl-tree. 1  It  has  pearls, 
but  they  are  not  fish-pearls.2  The  ten  suns  are  like  pearls  of  the 
pearl-tree.  The  pearls  of  the  pearl-tree  look  like  pearls,  but  arc 
not  real  pearls.  Thus  the  ten  suns  look  like  the  sun,  but  are  not 
real  suns,  lltiai  Nan  Tse  having  read  the  Sluin-hai-king  wrougly 
asserted  tliat  for  a  Sage  teu  suns  were  lighted,  and  made  the  random 
statement  that  at  Yao's  time  ten  suns  rose  together. 

The  sun  is  fire,  the  "  Hot  Water  Abyss  "  water.  Water  and 
fire  annihilate  one  another.  Therefore  the  ten  suns  bathing  in  the 
" Hot  Water  Abyss  ，，  should  have  been  extinguished  and  destroyed. 
Fire  burns  trees,  Fu-sang  is  a  tree.  When  tcu  suns  rested  upon 
it,  it  ought  to  be  parched  aud  scorched  up.  However,  in  spite 
of  the  bath  in  7  ang-ku  the  light  did  not  become  extinguished,  and 
though  the  suns  ascended  Fu-sai'g、  its  boughs  were  not  scorched 
or  parched.  The  ten  suns  are  like  the  sun  which  rises  to-day,  yet 
tliey  canuot  be  tested  by  the  five  elements.3  Hence  we  infer  that 
tliey  were  not  real  suns. 

Wlieu  Yil  and  Yi  beheld  ten  suus,  it  cannot  have  been  night- 
time, but  must  have  been  day.  Wheu  one  sun  rose,  the  other  nine 
must  have  been  left  behind,  how  could  they  rise  all  ten  together?4 
It  must  have  been  like  dawn  before  the  sunrise.6 

Furthermore,  heaven  turns  and  passes  through  a  certain  number 
of  degrees.    If  the  various  suns  follow  this  movement,  and  turn 

1  Presumably  a  coral- tree  in  the  Persian  Sea  is  meant. 
， The  Chinese  imagine  that  pearla  or  the  produce  of  fisl',  not  of  shells 
or  oysters. 

s  If  they  were  of  the  same  stuff  as  our  sun,  vi:.  fire,  they  would  have  been 
extinguished  in  water,  and  have  burned  the  wood  of  the  Fu-mng  tree.  Since  they 
did  not  do  that,  ttiey  cannot  have  been  real  suns  like  ours. 

4  The  one  sun  in  the  upper  branches  of  the  Fu-sang  tree  must  have  risen 
prior  to  the  nine  others  still  lingering  in  the  lower  branches. 

•"•  As  far  as  l lie  nine  bima  are  coiicetnod,  whicli  were  still  below  tlie  horizon. 

huii-llrng.  1^ 


Digitized  by  Google 


274 


Lnn-Hcng:  C.  Physical. 


round  with  heaven,  how  could  tUcy  remain  in  the  branches  of 
Ftt-sang  or  in  the  wator  of  the  Mot  Water  Abyss?  "  In  case  they 
stay  back,  tla*y  miss  the  nirtvenu'nt,  and  diU'e  re  rices  in  the  movement 
would  bring  disharmony.  If,  therefore,  tlie  rising  sun  be  difl'erent 
from  the  ten  suns,  they  only  resemble  suus,  but  are  not  suns. 

" During  the  i  Spring  and  Autumn  '  period  on  the  hsin  mao 
day,  in  the  fourth  month  of  sutnnicr,  in  the  seventh  year  of  Duke 
Chmny  at  midnight  the  common  stars  were  invisible,  and  stars  1VII 
down  like  rain." 1  , 

Ktmg  Yang  in  his  commentary  asks: ― What  does  "like  rain" 
mean?  It  is  iuit  rain.  Then,  why  use  tliis  expression ？  "  The  un- 
re  vised  Ch  un-ch  iu "  says,  "It  rained  stars,  which  previous  to  ap- 
proaching to  within  a  loot  of  the  earth  departed  again."  The  Sage 
corrected  this,  and  said,  "Tl"'  stars  fell  down  like  rain."2 

" The  uurcvised  Ch  un-ch' iu  "  refers  to  the  time,  when  tile  Ch  uu- 
c/i  iu  was  not  yet  revised.  At  that  time  the  Chronieh;  of  Lu  had 
the  following  entry: ― "The  stars  iell  down  like  rain.  They  came 
near  the  earth  at  a  distance  oi'  over  a  loot,  and  tlien  (le]>artc(l 
again."  Tln«  Sugc  is  Confucius,  t'onfucitis  revised  it,  and  said  "  The 
stars  tell  like  rain."  His  idea  was  that  (m  the  earth  there  are 
mountains,  liills,  and  liigh  building,  and  he  was  afi'ai'l  lest  the 
statement  aliout  tlie  stars  coniiiig  near  the  oartli  at  a  tlixtam:e  of 
over  a  foot  should  not  be  (rue.3  Tlierefore  he  made  an  altcratioii, 
aud  said  "  like  rain."  Being  like  rain  they  came  down  Iron]  above 
the  earth.  The  stars  also  fall  down  from  heuvtui  ami  depart  again. 
On  account  of  tliis  similarity  ho  says  41  like."  Altliougli  there  was 
tlic  notice  tljat  the  stars  came  near  the  earth  at  a  distance  oi"  over 
a  foot,  he  mort'ly  said  44  like  rain."  Tl"'  ex|)iTssion  "lalliiig"  whicli 
lie  uses  rulers  lo  tliose  stars.  Tliough  lie  assigned  them  tlifir  places, 
and  lixed  tht*  text,  lie  speaks  of  the  falling  stars  in  the  same  way 
as  tlie  Clironit-le  doe». 

When  from  the  plain  we  look  up  at  Mount  T' ni，  and  beliohl 
a  crane  on  its  summit,  it  appears  to  us  us  big  as  a  crow,  and  a 
crow,  like  a  sparrow.  It  is  tlie  lioiglit  of  Mount  T  ai  and  its  dis- 
tance which  cause  us  to  lose  tlu*  true  estimate  of  the  size  of  tliiugs. 


1   Cf.  Ch  un-ch  iu  {Lfyye,  Classics  Vol.  V,  i't.  I.  p.  7").   Tlie  scventli  year  of 
Duke  ('hutin,/  of  Lu  is  08»>  n.r. 

- A  <|Uotatioii  from  h'w'y  l  and's  comriientary  to  tlie  (  h  un-chUi. 

Had  tl"'  distance  of  those  meteors  not  lioen  more  ilian  one  foot  I'roiu  the 
surface  of  Uic  eartli.  they  would  ine\  itably  have  collided  with  tl"'  elfvatioim  of  the- 
earth,  such  as  niountaiiis,  buildings,  etc.  Therefore  f  '<>"/"('""  omitted  the  remark  of 
the  original  text. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun. 


275 


The  distance  of  heaven  from  earth  amouuts  to  upwards  of  60,000  Li, 
ulnrh  is  not  only  the  height  and  the  distance  of  the  summit  of 
Mount  T  al.  The  stars  arc  fixed  to  heaven.  When  we  examine 
tl"'m，  we  do  not  obtaiu  a  correct  idea  of  tlioir  nature,  lor  the  con- 
ditions, under  wliicli  we  see  them,  are  still  more  unfavourable  than 
those,  under  wliich  we  look  at  the  era ue  or  the  crow.  By  cal- 
culations we  find  that  tl»e  size  of  the  stars  must  be  a  liuntlred  Li. 
Their  brilliancy  is  so  strong,  tliat  they  shed  liglit.  If,  nevertheless, 
they  appear  to  us  only  as  big  as  a  phfpnix  egg,  we  luive  lost  the 
tnie  estimate  by  distance. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  fulling  stars  are  in  fact  stars  falling 
Irom  licuveu,  then  \sv  would  not  he  a)>le  to  recognise  thcin  as  stars, 
when  thoy  approach  the  earth,  because  during  their  fall  their  size 
is  not  the  same  as  that  which  tlioy  have  in  heaven. 1  Now,  as  long 
as  we  see  the  falling  stars  in  lieaven,  they  are  stars,  if  tliev  are 
not,  1 1  iey  are  made  up  of  air.  We  see  gliosts  liaving  tlie  semblance 
of  dead  people.  In  reality  it  is  but  air  condensed  into  those  forms, 
not  real 山' ad  prople.  Thus  tl»e  falling  ！ slurs  are  in  reality  not 
shaped  like  stars.  Confucius  correctly  calls  tht'in  falling,  which  means 
tliat  they  are  not  stars,  and  riglitly  cliar:"，ti'rises  them  as  being 
like  rain,  L  e.  tliey  art*  not  rain,  both  features  being  opposed  to 
tlie  real  nature  of  stars. 

The  Tso-chuan  remarks  on  the  above  tjuoted  passage  of  the 
(h'wt-ch  iu,  "On  the  hsin-mao  day,  in  tlie  fourth  moon  during  tlfie 
night  the  coininon  stars  were  not  visihlc.  because  the  night  was 
bright.  The  stars  it'll  like  ruin  /.  e.  togetlitT  with  rain."  This  re- 
mark that  tlie  stars  were  invisihlc  owing  to  tin;  brightness  of  tlie 
niglit  tallies  with  a  passage  in  tin-  Yik'my2  to  the  i'll'e',t  that  at 
mid-day  the  Dipper3  is  visible.  If  during  the  day  the  Dipper  is 
visible,  it  must  be  dark,  nor  liriglit,  ami  if  'luring  the  night  the 
stars  were  invisible,  the  uigltt  must  have  bt't'n  bright  aud  clear. 
The  facts  were  dilFerent,  but  the  klt'a  is  the  same,  aud  it  is  con- 
sistent with  truth. 

Tlie  Tso  chwtn  says  "  togi、tl"'r  with  rain,"  whicli  is  tautauiount 
to  coinUiticd."  On  the  li.sin-inao  day  (lie  night  was  bri^lit,  thcic- 
l*o  r»'  the  stars  were  invisible,  but  t  his  brightness  shows  that  tlie  re 
was  no  rain.  Tlu*  ruin  fluid  is  dark  and  obscure,  how  ooulil  t here 
be.  brightnt'ss  tlian ?  Thrre  being  bright ncss,  rain  is  impossible, 
how  could  the  stars  fall  *'  tooctlicr  with  raiu':' "   Consocjuently  the 

1  Tlie  meteors  never  measure  a  liiuidred  Li.  . 
- Yiking,  f)5t!i  diagram  (F^'ng),  Leyije'^  traiisl.  p.  33(5. 
-1  A  cunstellation. 

Digitized  by  Google 


27G 


Lnii  -  Heng  ：  (、.  Physical 


expression  "  together  with  rain  "  is  wrong.  Moreover,  if  it  be  said 
that  the  night  was  so  bright,  that  the  stare  became  invisible,  how 
could  the  stars  falling  together  with  rain  be  seen? 

"On  the  wn-shin  day  of  the  first  month  in  the  16th  year  of 
Duke  Hsi  five  stones  fell  down  in  Sunff."  1  The  Tso-chuan  remarks 
that  tliey  were  stars.  Since  falling  stones  are  called  stars,  those 
stars  are  believed  to  have  become  stones  by  falling.  The  stars 
falling  in  the  hsin-mao  night  were  stars,  but  in  reality  stones  then. 
If  the  stars  falling  in  the  hsin-mao  night  wero  like  those  stones, 
the  earth  had  liigli  buildings,  wliic.h  must  have  been  smaslicd. 
Although  ('otiftu'im  omitted  to  mention  that  tlie  stars  came  near  the 
earth  as  far  as  one  foot,  there  certainly  has  l"'eii  a  certain  distance 
from  the  earth,  and  the  historigrapher  of  Lai,  who  saw  the  event 
\vit)i  his  own  eyes,  would  not  have  said  so  at  random. 

According  to  tlie  Tso-chuan  the  stars  fell  clown  together  with 
rain.  As  rain  collects  on  the  earth,  tlie  stones  must  have  done  so 
likewise,  but,  sinci',  when  they  touched  the  earth,  tliey  did  not 
demolish  tlie  buildings,  it  is  evident  tliat  they  were  not  stars. 
Besides,  on  what  does  Tso  ( 'h  iu  Ming  base  his  statement  thut  the 
stones  were  stars?  Wlien  the  stones  came  down,  their  fall  was 
very  Hglit,  but  wliy  must  they  liave  fallen  down  from  heaven  ? 

Daring  tlie  Ch'in  epocli  three  mountains  disappeared.  Partly 
they  、ver'、  not  dispersed,  but  collapsed,  where  they  stood,  which 
must  have  caused  a  threat  noise.  Perhaps  at  that  time  the  mountain 
of  the 【 Ti  went  ofl"  its  base,  and  came  down  in  Sung.  When  the 
people  of  Sung  lieard  tlie  stones  fall,  they  called  them  stars,  and 
when  Tm  Ch  in  Ming  had  examined  them,  he  also  gave  tliem  this 
name. 

The  substance  of  the  stars  is  identical  、vith  that  of  the  various 
things  and  like  that  of  the  sun  and  t)u«  moon.  The  so-called  Five 
Planets  are  tlie  light,  of  tlie  substance  of  the  live  elements.  Tlie 
Five  Planets  and  the  other  stars  all  have  the  same  light,  tlie  re- 
fore  I  am  afraid  tliat  we  miss  the  truth,  if  we  regard  the  fixed 
stars  alone  as  stones.  In  reality  tlie  stars  which  fell  (luring  the 
/"、;n-inao  night  were  like  rain,  but  they  were  not  stars,  just  as  the 
ten  suns  in  the  "  Hot  Water  Abyss  "  resembled  the  sun,  but  were 
not  real  suns. 

The  Literati  also  maiutain  that  the  expression  that  raiu  comes 
from  heaven  means  that  it  positively  falls  down  from  heaven.  How- 


1  Quoted  from  the  Ch  un-ch'iu  (Le^e  Vol.  V,  Pt.  I,  p.  170).   The  event  took 
place  in  643  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  the  Sun.  277 

ever,  a  discussion  on  tins  subject  leads  us  to  tlie  conclusion  that  rain 
comes  from  above  the  earth,  but  not  down  from  heaven.  Seeing 
the  rain  gathering  from  above,  、vc  simply  say  that  it  comes  down 
from  heaven.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  comes  from  above  the  earth. 
But  liow  can  we  demoustrate  that  the  rain  comes  from  the  earth, 
and  rises  from  the  mountains?  The  Commentary  to  the  Ch  un-ch' iux 
says,  "  It  breaks  through  the  stones  one  to  two  inclies  thick,  and 
gathers.  That  in  one  (lay's  time  it  spreads  over  the  whole  Empire, 
is  only  tlie  case  with  the  T'ai-shan." 3  ―  From  the  T'ai-shan  it  rains 
over  the  whole  Empire,  from  small  mountains  over  one  State,  the 
distance  depends  on  the  height.  As  regards  the  forthcoming  of 
the  rain  from  the  mountains,  some  hold  that  the  clouds  carry  the 
rain  with  them.  When  the  clouds  disperse,  the  water  falls  down, 
and  is  called  rain.  Thus  the  clouds  are  rain,  and  rain,  clouds. 
When  the  water  comes  forth,  it  is  transformed  into  clouds;  they 
condense,  and  become  rain,  and,  when  they  are  compressed  still 
more,  coagulate  into  dew.  When  garments  are  moistened  as  with 
rain,  it  is  not  the  effect  of  the  clouds,  but  of  the  rain  which  they 


Some  persons  will  refer  to  tlie  Shukinff  which  says,  "When 
the  moon  follows  the  stars,  there  is  wind  and  rain,"8  and  to  the 
Shiking,  where  we  read  that  "  Tlie  moon  approaches  the  Hyades. 
which  will  bring  heavy  showers  of  rain."4  They  all  believe  that 
according  to  these  passages  of  the  two  Classics  it  is  not  heaven 
which  is  causing  the  rain.    How  is  that? 

When  the  rain  comes  from  the  mountains,  the  moon  passes 
the  stars,  and  approaches  the  Hyades.  When  she  approaches  the 
Hyades,  it  must  rain.  As  long  as  it  does  not  rain,  the  moon  does 
not  approach,  and  the  mountains  have  no  clouds.  Heaven  and 
earth,  above  and  below,  act  in  spontaneous  harmony.  When  the 
moon  approaches  above,  tlie  mountains  are  heated  below,  and  the 
fluid  unites.  The  fortuitous  connexion  between  the  various  iluids 
and  bodies  is  clue  to  spontaneity.  Clouds  aud  fog  show  that 
there  is  rain.  In  summer  it  becomes  dew,  in  winter  frost.  Warm 
it  is  rain,  cold,  snow.  Rain,  dew,  and  frost  all  proceed  from  eartli, 
and  do  not  descend  from  heaven. 

1  Kung  Yang'*  Commentary,  Duke  Hsi  31st  year. 
， The  highest  peak  in  Shant'tug. 

3  Shukinp,  llunjf-fan,  Pt.  V，  Bk.  IV,  3H  {Le9<je  Vol.  HI.  Pt.  II,  p.  342). 

*  Shiking  Pt.  U,  Bk.  VIII,  Ode  8  (Ugge  Vol:  IV,  Pt.  II,  p.  422). 


Digitized  by  Google 


27S 


Lun-H6ng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 
On  Heat  and  Cold  .(Han-wen). 

People  reasoning  on  lieat  and  cokl  assert  that,  when  the 
sovereign  is  pleased,  it  is  warm,  and,  when  lie  is  an^ry,  it  is  cokl. 
How  is  that? 

Joy  and  anger  originate  in  the  bosom.  Subsequently  thev 
find  their  way  out,  and  once  outsidr,  arc  the  causes  of  rewards  ami 
punishments,  rewards  and  punislnnents  being  the  manifestations  of 
joy  and  auger.  When  heat  and  cold  are  sufficiently  strong,  tliinirs 
become  withored,  and  men  "re  injured,  and  that  is  done  by  heat 
aud  cold,  which  an*  said  to  be  the  representatives  of  joy  and  anger. 

Within  tlie  course  of  a  low  days  a  sovereign  is  not  ahvays 
full  of  joy  or  anger,  which  sentiments  having  broken  forth  i'rmn 
the  bosom,  expand  and  appear  as  heat  and  cold  outside,  thus  slimving 
the  feelings  of  the  bosom.  "When  tlie  sovereign  is  pleased  or  angry, 
tins  fluid  of  his  bosom  is  not  elianged  into  lieat  or  cold.  Why 
should  tlie  fluid  in  his  bosom  be  diflercnt  from  the  (luid  witiiiu  t\w 
territory  of  a  country?  The  fluid  of  tlie  bosom  is  not  transfonntHl 
through  joy  or  anger,  how  then  should  heat  and  cold  originate 
within  the  territory? 

During  the  time  ("•  tlie  Six  States, 1  and  the  C/iiu  aud  Han 
epoch  the  feudal  princes  were  -subjugating  one  another,  armour-clad 
warriors  filling  all  the  roads.  The  States  were  investing  each  other 
with  the  greatest  animosity,  and  their  leaders  tliought  of  nothing 
else  than  of  vanquishing  their  enemios.  A  feeling  of  universal 
slaughter  pervaded  everything;.  Yet  at  that  time  it  was  not  always 
cold  in  the  Km  pi  re.  The  time  of  Yil  was  one  of  universal  peace. 
The  government  was  good,  the  peopl"  contented,  and  t)u-  sovereign 
ahvays  pleased.  In  every  hous<i  they  wore  playing  the  guitar, 
singing,  beating  drums,  and  (lam'iug.  Yet  at  thai  time  it  was  not 
constantly  warm  in  the  Empire.  Is  tlie  feeling  of  joy  and  ang<'r 
evoked  by  small  things  only,  and  <loos  it  not  rare  for  great  ones? 
How  is  it  so  little  in  accordance  witli  the  deeds  done? 

1  y'tn,  Chao,  Han,  Wri,  Ck'i  and  Ch'u,  which  in  332  b.c.  made  an  offensive 
and  defensive  alliance  to  check  the  encroachments  of  the  Ch'in  State,  but  by  and  by 
tlif  latter  overpowered  and  absorbed  them  all. 


Digitized  by  do 


On  Heat  and  Cold. 


279 


Near  the  water  it  is  cold,  near  tlie  fire  warm,  the  heat  arxl 
the  <*ol(l  decrease  in  groporti'm  to  the  distarn-e,  for  the  tiviantity 
of  tho  lluid  varies  accortliug  to  tlie  distance.  The  seat  of  the  fin- 
is always  in  the  south,  that  of  the  water  in  the  north,1  1 1  lore  fort- 
the  nortliorn  region  is  cold,  and  (lie  soul  horn  limit  hot. 

The  fire  in  a  stove,  the  water  in  a  ditch,  and  the  fluid  in  the 
human  body  arc  all  governed  hy  tlie  same  principle.  When  (lie 
sovereign  is  pli^sed  or  :"igty,  tliis  fluid  of  heat  or  cold  ought  to 
he  especially  strung  in  liis  private  apartments,  and  ininrh  less  so 
outside  his  territory.  Now  the  temperature  is  tin'  same  without  and 
within,  onse([uontly  it  cannot  、vi、ll  be  the  result  of  tlie  sovrmgn's 
joy  or  anger,  and  tl"、  assertions  of  our  scholars  to  tliat  ell  Vet  are  f'u  tile. 

With  an  ompcror  a  s»(l(l«*n  cliango  of  the  mental  fluid  takes 
place  in  the  enipin",  with  prinens  in  their  territory,  with  iuiuistcrs 
and  high  offirrrs  in  tli,、ii'  department,  ami  with  coiiiinou  |)co])le 
in  tlu-ir  house.  Since  even  ordinary  people  arc  liable  to  such 
changes,  their  joy  and  tl"'ir  anger  must  also  proiluce  such  lluids 
(as  heat  and  cold ).  Tlie  father  (juarrels  with  tht*  son,  and  hus- 
bantl  and  wile  reprove  one  anotlior.  IT  tliorc  ought  to  be  anger, 
but  anger  bv  turned  into  joy,  or  if  faults  bt'  forgiven,  and  the 
wrong  done  liuslied  up,  there  would  be  cold  :in,l  l"'at  in  the  same 
house.  This  shows  us  that  the  sudden  cliangos  (of  tt'iuporature) 
are  not  being  caused  by  joy  and  anger. 

Some  on，、  will  say  tliat  there  is  attraction  by  afTmity.  It'  a 
man  be  j> leased,  he  is  kind  and  gonial,  and  in  his  kindliest  gives 
Howards.  The  Yany  principle  is  giving,  ami  the  Ynu<j  fluid  is  warm, 
therefore  tlie  warm  lluid  corresponds  to  it.  If  a  man  be  angry, 
lie  is  enraged  and  indignant,  and  in  his  rage  jmts  people  to  death. 
The  Yin  principk*  is  cold  niunU'r,  and  the  Yin  <luid  is  cold,  tl"'re- 
fore  the  cold  fluid  rorrespotids  to  it.  "  Wlicn  tl"，  tiger  howls,  tlie 
wind  blows  lroin  the  valloy,  and  、vl""i  tlie  dragon  performs  its 
antics,  the  brilliant  clouds  rise."2  Their  fluids  being  identical,  and 
their  species  tlie  same,  tliey  attract  on*1  another.  Hence  tlie  sjiying 
that  witli  the  body  one  removes  the  shadow,  and  thai  with  the 
dragon  on''  attracts  the  rain.-1  Tlie  rain  responds  to  the  dragon 
and  comes,  the  shadow  rrspoixls  to  tlio  body  and  goes.4  The  nature 

1  According  to  ancient  nntutal  jiliilosopliy.  Consequently  temperature  cannot 
l)C  the  result  of  the  feelings  <>f  the  sovereign. 

1  A  quotation  I'rom  Huni  .\an  T  r  III,  2.  with  n  slight  variation  of  the  text. 

5  Thei  efori!  during  a  droiij^lit  day  figures  of  dragons  are  set  up  and  worship- 
ped to  attract  tlie  rain.    Cf.  p.  ;>.'>,  No.  47. 

*   •' ':.  with  【lic  Imdy. 


Digitized  by  Google 


2S0 


Lnn-H*ng:  C.  Physical. 


of  heaven  and  earth  is  spontaneity.  In  autumn  and  winter  punish- 
ments are  meted  out.1  Smaller  misdemeanours  are  partly  pardoned, 
but  the  capital  punishments  cause  a  bitter  cold.  The  cold  comes 
as  an  accompaniment  of  punishment,  which  shows  that  they  attract 
one  another. 

If  heat  and  cold  be  compared  with  wind  and  clouds,  and  joy 
and  anger  refer  to  the  dragon  and  the  tiger,  a  mutual  attraction 
might  be  possible,  provided  that  the  fluids  be  the  same  and  the 
categories  similar.8  When  the  tiger  howls,  the  wind  rises  from  the 
valley,  and  when  the  dragon  gambols,  the  clouds  rise  within  a 
radius  of  one  hundred  Li,  but  in  other  valleys  and  other  regions 
there  is  no  wind  nor  clouds.  Nov,  sudden  irhanges  of  temperature 
take  place  everywhere,  aud  at  the  same  time.  There  may  be  exe- 
cutions within  a  territory  of  a  hundred  Li,  but  it  is  cold  witliin 
a  thousand  Li,  consequently  this  could  not  well  be  considered  a 
proof  of  a  connexion  between  the  two  events.  Cl\i  and  Lu  were 
conterminous,  and  gave  rewards  and  punishments  at  the  same  time. 
Had  Clii  rewarded,  while  Lu  punished,  the  effects  would  have  been 
different  also.  Could  then  the  C/ti  State  have  been  warm,  whereas 
it  was  cold  at  the  same  time  in  the  Lu  country? 

In  former  times  nobody  was  more  cruel  in  punishing  than 
C/iUi  Yu  and  tlie  doomed  prince  of  (  'A  m.3  The  subjects  of  Ch'iJi  Yu 
were  most  perverse  and  dissolute,  and  in  doomed  Cli  in  red  clad 
crimioals  were  walking  on  the  roads  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  yet 
at  that  time  it  was  not  always  cold  in  the  Empire.  On  the  market 
of  the  emperor's  capital  oxen  and  sheep  were  slaughtered  every 
day  by  hundreds.  He  who  executes  man  as  well  as  he  who  kills 
animals  has  a  wicked  heart.  Albeit,  the  air  on  the  market  place 
of  the  capital  cannot  always  be  cold.  . 

One  might  object  that  a  man  is  far  superior  to  animals,  and 
tliat  man  alone  provokes  the  fluid.  However,  does  the  one  who 
puts  to  death  provoke  the  fluid,  or  do  those  who  are  put  to  death, 
cause  the  change?  In  the  first  case,  no  matter,  wlietber  the  one 
who  inflicts  tlie  death  penalty  executes  a  mau,  or  kills  an  animal, 
the  mind  is  the  same,  and  in  tlie  latter  men  and  beasts  are  both 
creatures.  They  all  belong  to  the  ten  thousaiid  beings,  and  would 
not  a  hundred  mean  ones  be  worth  as  much  as  one  precious  one? 

Some  people  will  maintain  that  a  sovereign  alone  can  evoke 
the  fluid,  but  not  common  people.    If,  to  set  tlie  fluid  in  motion, 

«  Cf.  p.  148  Note  7. 

*  An  attraction  between  joy  and  heat,  anger  and  cold. 
3   Ch  in  Shih  Huang  Ti. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Heat  and  Cold. 


281 


a  sovereign  is  required,  why  does  the  world  make  so  mucli  of  Tson 
Yen?  Tson  Yen  was  a  commoner,  and  yet  he  could  move  the  fluid 
quite  alone,  as  everybody  admits.1  . 

When  one  man  is  put  to  death,  the  air  becomes  cold,  but, 
when  a  man  is  born,  does  tlic  temperature  become  warm  then? 
When  a  general  amnesty  is  granted  to  the  four  quarters,  and  all 
punishments  are  remitted  at  the  same  time,  the  fluid  of  the  month 
and  the  year  does  not  become  warm  thereby.  • 

In  former  years  thousands  of  people  have  had  their  houses 
burnt,  so  that  the  flames  and  the  smoke  went  up  to  heaven,  and 
the  Yellow  River  broke  through  its  dykes,  flooding  a  tliousaud  Li, 
so  that  far  and  wide  there  was  no  bound  to  the  prospect.  Fire 
is  identical  with  the  hot  fluid,  and  water  with  the  cold  one.  At 
the  time  of  the  conflagration  or  the  inundation  of  the  Yellow  River 
it  has  not  been  warm  or  cold.  The  setting  in  of  heat  ami  cold  do 
not  depend  on  government,  I  dare  say,  but  eventually  heat  and  cold 
may  be  simultaneous  witli  rewards  and  punishments,  and  it  is  for 
this  reason  that  the  phenomenalists 3  describe  them  as  such. 

Spring  is  warm,  summer  hot,  autumn  cool,  and  winter  cold. 
These  four  seasons  arc  spontaneous,  aud  do  not  concern  the  sover- 
eign. The  four  seasons  are  not  caused  by  government,  but  tliey 
say  that  heat  and  cold  correspond  to  it.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
first  month  and  subsequently  at  the  "  commencement  of  spring ,, 
all  the  punishments  have  been  meted  out,  and  the  prisons  remain 
empty.  Yet  one  day  it  is  cold,  and  one  day  warm.  What  manner 
of  punishment  is  being  inflicted,  when  it  is  cold,  and  what  kind 
ol'  rewards  are  given,  when  it  is  warm?  We  see  from  this  that 
heat  and  cold  correspond  to  the  time  periods  of  heaven  and  earth,3 
and  are  not  made  by  men. 

When  people  are  suffering  from  a  cold  or  from  fever,  their 
actions  liave  no  influence  upon  these  diseases.  By  exposure  to  the 
wind,  or  to  bad  air  their  body  has  become  chilly  or  feverish.  By 
changing  their  habits,  or  altering  their  style  of  life  they  do  not 

1  When  T»ou  Yen,  a  scholar  of  the  4tli  cent,  b.c,  had  been  put  into  prison 
npon  a  trumped  np  charge,  he  looked  up  to  heaven  and  wept.  All  of  a  sudden 
8now  began  to  fall,  although  it  was  midsummer.    See  also  p.  194. 

s  A  class  of  scholars,  often  mentioned  in  the  Lun-henp,  who  seem  to  have 
devoted  themselves  to  the  study  of  natural  plienomena  and  calamities,  such  as  heat 
and  cold,  inundations,  droughts,  famines,  etc.  to  which,  howower,  thoy  did  not  ascribe 
natural,  but  moral  causes,  misled  by  the  pseudo-science  of  the  Y iking  and  similar  worka. 

*  Of  which  the  Chinese  distinguish  24,  beginning  with  li-ch'un  "  commencement 
of  spriug."  They  count  from  the  days  on  which  the  sun  enters  the  first  and  fifteenth 
degree  of  one  of  the  zodiacal  aigaa. 


Digitized  by  Google 


282 


Lun-Heng:  C.  PhvM<*al. 


get  rid  of  their  cold  or  their  fever.  Although  tlie  body  is  quite 
near,  it  cannot  bring  ab'mt  a  cl>an»e  and  a  cure.  Now  a  <*itv  or 
a  State  is  mu',li  more  distant,  how  should  it  be  possible  to  regu- 
late tlieir  fluids?  —When  a  man  lias  cau^lit  cold,  lie  drinks  medi- 
cine, wliirli  soothes  tiis  pain,  and  wlien,  being  somewhat  weak,  he 
has  got  fevtT,  he  swallows  pills,  wliich  make  him  perspire,  and 
thus  cure  him. 

In  Yen  there  was  the  "  Cold  Valley  "  in  which  tlie  five  kinds 
of  i^rain  did  not  grmv.  7:sou  Yen  blew  the  flute,  and  the  "  Cold 
Valley  "  could  be  cultivated.  The  poople  of  Yen  sowed  millet  in 
it,  and  called  it  "  Millet  Valley."  If  this  be  trur  that  witli  playing 
the  flute  the  cold  fluid  was  dispelled.  l»o\v  could  tliis  calamity  be 
averted  by  a  cliaii£?e  of  government  or  action  ？  Tli,'r('for(%  a  cold 
and  feviT  cannot  bo  cured  but  witli  medicine,  and  the  fl\iid  of  the 
" Millet  Valley  "  cannot  be  t.ransfoniu、(l  but  with  music. 

When  Yao  was  visited  with  tlie  (Ireat  Flood,  lie  ordered  Yil 
to  re^ulatr  it.  Colli  and  lieat  arc  essentially  the  same  as  t\w  Great 
Flood. 1  Yao  did  not  change  his  administration  or  conduct,  beinj; 
well  aware  that  the  Great  Flood  was  not  the  ivsult  of  government 
or  conduct.  Since  the  Flood  was  not  brought  about  by  govern- 
ment or  conduct,  we  know  that  heat  and  cold  cauimt  be  caused 
by  government  either. 

Some  one  might  in  disproof  quote  from  tlie  "  Various  Veri- 
Hcations  "  of  the  llung-fan  which  says  that  4i  oxcitoment  is  as  a  rule 
accompanied  by  rold,  and  i^ieorfulncss  by  tepidity."'-  Aoconj[)anie<l 
means :  followed,  te]M(lity:  warmth,  and  "as  a  rule*:  "  always. 
Wlien  the  sovercigi)  is  excited,  <-oId  woatlier  always  follows,  when 
lie  is  clieerful,  warm  weather  follows.  Cold  and  lieat  correspoinl 
to  excitement  and  cheerfulness,  how  can  tlieir  connexion  with  the 
f'rmnei"  Ik' 山' :、  Docs  the  (lasnic  say  tliat  excitenicnt  causes 
no  cold,  and  nbeerfulnesa  no  warmth? 

The  sovereign  <、xd"'(l  or  cheerful,  cold  or  lieat  set  in, 

but  by  cli;in<*«'  and  of  tlicir  own  accord.  If  tliey  corresponded  in- 
Initionally,  it  would  1"、  like  the  obtaining  of  omens  by  divining 
with  sliclls,  or  like  tlie  lindiinr  of  numbers  l>y  t«'IHni»  tlie  fortune 
froui  straws.  P<'<、|'le  pn'tond  that  Ik-ji ven  a»d  earth  respond  to 
the  (juosrions  addrosed  to  tlunn.  hut.  as  ； i  matter  of  fact,  it  is 
iu>tliiu<;  hut  cliruicc.  Heat  uml  rolil  n^sjiond  to  excitement  and 
cluMTfulncss,  as  ointMis  und  mimbcrs  are  tlio  ivsponse  to  rlie  in- 


1   They  are  all  natural  phenomena. 

， -、 7, 丄,, v.  〃.,',,/-,""  Pt.V,  Bk.  IV,  31  (Le^ye  Vol.  Ill,  Vt.  11,  p.  340). 


Digitized  by.  Gpoglr 


On  Heat  and  Cold. 


288 


quiriea  of  the  diviners.  Externally  they  seem  to  respond,  but  actu- 
ally it  is  hazard.    How  can  、v<、  prove  that? 

The  principle  of  heaven  is  spontaneity.  Spontaneity  moans 
absence  of  purpose.  Wlien  the  two  kinds  of  divination  are  applied, 
tilings  may  meet  ovontually,  or  liappen  by  accident,  and  perhaps 
coincide  with  human  a  (lairs.  The  heavenly  fluid  is  there  already, 
tli  ere  fore  one  may  speak  of  a  principle.  Should  it  correspond  to 
government,  however,  there  would  be  no  more  spontaneity. 

Cfiing  1  has  distributed  the  G4  symbols  of  tlif  Yiking  over  one 
year.  One  symbol  rules  over  6  days  and  7I  |0.  The  symbols  consist 
of  Yin  and  Yang.'1  The  fluid  rises  au<l  falls.  When  the  Yang  fltiid 
rises,  it  becomes  warm,  and,  when  the  Yin  fluid  rises,  it  becomes 
cold.  A  wording  to  this  theory  lieat  ami  cold  depend  on  the  sym- 
bols, hut  do  not  corres|)ond  to  gm'mmiciit.  It)  acrordanre  with 
the  "  、vu-、vang  ，，  symbol3  of  tlic  Yiking,  inundations  and  drouglits 
liave  fixed  times.  All  the  innumerahlo  <  alamities  and  disasters  are 
of  the  same  kind. 

1  am  afraid  that  the  plionomonalists  have  missed  the  truth 
for  the  following  reason ： ― "  The  ideal  man  is  endowed  with  the 
same  virtue  as  heaven  and  earth.  When  man  takes  tlie  lead,  liraven 
dot's  not  disagree  with  liim,  and  when  he  follows  heaven,  he  re- 
spects heaveu  s  rime.  ' 4  1'he  Hung-fmi  on  tlie  otlier  liand  says  that 
ik  excitement  is  as  a  rule  accompn nied  by  cold,  and  cliperfulness  by 
tepidity."  According  to  this  passage  of  flu*  Ilung-fun  tlie  heavenly 
fluid  follows  man.  Tlie  Yiking  however  only  says  that,  wlien  man 
takes  the  lead,  heaven  does  not  disa^rw  with  him.  But  why  does 
it  add  tliat,  wlien  lie  follows  hojivfii,  lio  respects  heaven's  time? 
To  follow  means  that  heaven  was  already  cold  or  hot  before,  and 
that  man  followed  with  his  rewards  and  punisliments  afterwards. 
Tliis  statement  of  imm  does  not  ugrca  with  the  S/mking.  That  is 
my  first  doubt. 

Clnng  determines  heat  and  cold  by  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  fluids 
ascending  and  dpscendin^.  wlicreas  the  plK'noinenalists  l.iy  all  the 
stress  on  punishments,  joy  and  auger.  The  two  schools  walk  dif- 
ferent ways.   That  is  my  second  doubt. 

When  people  (leterniinc  ！ irat  and  cold,  it  may  be  cold  to-day, 
and  warm  to-raorrow,  or  at  dawn  there  is  plenty  of  hoar-frost, 

1  Ching  Fang,  a  metaphysician  of  the  1st  cent,  n.c,  who  spent  much  labour 
on  the  elucidation  of  the  Yiking, 

2  Marked  by  broken  and  unbroken  lines. 

3  The  25th  hexagram  of  the  Yikin7. 

*  Quotation  from  the  Yihitiff,  1st  diagram  (f'h'ien).    Cf.  pp.  OS  and  128. 


gitized  by  Google 


284 


I-un  -  Heng :  C.  Physical. 


and  in  the  ovening  resplendent  light,  or  one  morning  is  rainy,  but 
warm,  and  another  bright  and  coKl.  Now  rain  is  Yint  and  bright- 
ness Yang,  and  couvcrscly  cold  is  Yin,  and  warmth  is  Yang.  A  rainy 
day  may  clear  up,  and  become  mid,  and  a  bright  day  become 
rainy,  and  warm.  Tlie  categories  do  not  correspond  correctly.  That 
is  my  third  doubt. 

These  three  doubts  are  not  set  at  rest,  and  the  principle  of 
spontaneity  is  not  upheld  either. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


285 


CHAPTER  XXU. 
On  Thunder  and  Lightning  、Lei-hsti、, 

In  midsummer  thunder  and  lightning  rapidly  following  each 
other,  split  trees,  demolish  houses,  and  occasionally  kill  men.  Com- 
mon people  arc  of  opinion  that,  when  the  lightning  strikes  a  tree, 
or  demolishes  a  house,  Heaven  fetches  a  dragon,  whereas,  when  a 
man  is  killed,  they  say  that  it  is  for  his  hidden  faults.  If  in  eating 
and  drinking  people  use  impure  things,  Heaven  becomes  angry,  and 
strikes  them  dead.  The  deep  rolling  sound  is  the  expression  of 
Heaven  8  anger  like  the  breathing  and  gasping  of  angry  men.  Every 
one,  no  matter  whether  intelligent  or  stupid,  says  so.  But  if  wc 
look  into  the  matter,  taking  human  nature  as  a  basis,  wc  find  that 
all  this  is  nonsense. 

By  a  thunder-stroke  one  fluid  is  set  in  motion,  and  one  sound 
produced. 1  A  tree  is  hit,  and  a  dwelling  damaged,  and  at  the  same 
time  a  man  may  be  killed.  When  a  man  is  slain,  a  tree  may  be 
struck,  and  a  house  damaged  also.  But  they  assert  that,  when  a 
tree  is  struck,  and  a  house  damaged.  Heaven  fetches  a  dragon, 
whereas,  when  it  kills  a  man,  it  punishes  him  for  his  hidden 
guilt.  In  that  case  something  inauspicious  would  clash  with  tlie 
auspicious  fetching  of  the  dragon.2  That  both  tilings  should  ha|>pen 
at  the  same  moment,  and  with  the  same  sound,  would  not  be  proper. 

It  has  been  argued  that  the  rolling  is  the  sound  of  Heaveu's 
growling.  That  would  be  appropriate  for  the  punishment  of  the 
guilty,  but  out  of  place  for  fetching  dragons.  In  meting  out  pun- 
ishment. Heaven  may  be  angry,  but,  when  it  fetches  a  dragou, 
what  fault  has  it,  that  it  should  be  irritated  like  that?  Providetl 
that  the  dragon  be  a  spirit,  then  Heaven  iu  fetching  it,  ought  not 
to  be  angry.  If,  however,  a  dragon  lias  faults,  which  are  to  be 
atoned  for  like  those  of  mau,  Heaven  would  kill  it,  but  why  must 
it  still  fetch  it?  While  destroying  a  man,  Heaven  may  be  in  wratli, 
but,  when  it  fetches  a  dragon,  、vliat  、vrong  has  the  dragon  done, 
that  Heaven  should  be  so  enragrd  at  it?  Having  smitten  a  man, 
Heaven  does  not  fetch  hitu.    If  under  the  same  《,ircumstancea  it 

1  The  same  force  destroys  the  trco.  the  house,  and  the  man. 
'l  The  dragon  is  accounted  u  i»inicd  auiiiiaJ. 


igitized  by  Google 


280 


Lun-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


does  so  witli  a  dragon,  wliat  di (Terence  is  there  between  human 
guilt  and  that  of  dragons?  If  both  arc  put  to  death,  wliere  does 
a  (liflrremro  come  in?  W e  can  no  more  accept  the  assertion  that 
Heaven  ft-tclies  dragons,  thau  approve  of  thr  idea  that  tlie  guilty 
meet  witli  their  dues  for  the  following  reasons : 

\V lu'ii  the  thunder  instantaneously  follows  upon  tlu*  lightning, 
and  a  man  falls  to  tlie  "-round  dead,  the  rollinff  sound  is  closo 
above  his  head,  whii'li  brings  about  his  deatli.  Hut  is  the  rolling 
really  Heaven's  anger?  If  so,  in  its  wratli,  it  would  kill  a  mau 
by  the  angry  breath  of  its  nioutli.  But  how  can  the  angry  breath 
oi*  a  mouth  kill  a  iiiaii?  On  cxaininiiig  tlie  body  of  a  man,  who 
has  bvvn  struck  hy  a  thmidorbolr,  one  discovers  traces  of  burning. 
Provided  that  Heaven  used  its  mouth  in  its  anger,  could  its  angry 
breath  beconu-  iievy  tlicn? 

Moreover,  tlie  nioutli  is  (！ onnectcd  with  tlie  body,  and  its  move- 
mi'iits  must  1"'  tlie  samo  as  those  of  the  body.  When  lii^htniug 
strikes,  tl»e  sound  is  on  the  oartli,  ami,  wlion  tin1  work  of  dostru<'- 
tion  is  done,  it  is  again  in  the  sky.  Now.  the  inomonf.  when  the 
sound  is  on  the  earth,  tlie  mouth  must  appioarh  it,  and  the  body 
do  the  same.  Hut,  it'  at  a  tl»undor-ola|)  we  look  up  to  Heaven,  wc 
do  not  seo  it  (loscendiiig.  Since  we  do  not  sec  it  come  down, 
the  rolling  souml  cannot  be  the  expression  of  Heaven's  anger. 

Heaven's  anger  can  not  lu-  (lillertnt  from  that  of  man.  When 
an  angry  ptM-son  comes  near  anybody,  his  voico  sounds  loud,  wlien 
lie  is  for  oil',  liis  vo",,'  smiis  low.  Now,  Heavou's  voice  is  near, 
but  its  body  far  away,    riicrefore,  aiif>;«'r  is  out  of  the  question. 

When  tli<'  pt、als  of  thunder  rapidly  one  another,  the 

sound  may  hr  in  tlie  Kast,  tlie  Wost,  tlie  North  or  the  South. 
I'rovith-tl  that  I  leaven  be  at)»ry  and  move  its  body,  then,  if  its 
moiitli  is  in  an  rastcrn,  \\  osteni.  nortliern,  or  soul  horn  direct iou, 
looking  up  、、'f  ought  to  see  1 1  raven  in  one  of  these  directions 
lilvciwise.  • 

Some  one  might  object  tliat  Ileavt'n  really  was  in  one  of  these 
tliivctiotis,  but  couM  not  be  so**n  by  man  owinj;-  to  the  obscurity, 
causetl  by  the  clouds  and  the  rain.  Yet  over  a  distance  of  a  thousand 
Li  tln'te  arc  not  the  saine  winds,  and  within  a  hundred  Li  tliere 
is  not  the  same  tcmjx'.st.  As  t'l"、  Yik'n«j  lias  it: ― "A  hundivd  Li 
are  IViglitencd  l)y  tlie  ooticu!>.sit>n."  1  Tlu*  n'^ioa  where  tlie  thun- 
(lerNtonn  is  ragiiij;',  is  tlarl"'ufd  hv  llie  tliundiM-clouds  and  the  rain, 
but  bcyoinl  a  hundivd  Li.  wliere  no  rain  is  falling,  one  ought  to 

' Yikiny  Book  V,  (  hi'n  Hoxagrani  (No.  .M). 


Digitized  b^_Gj 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


287 


see  Heaven  moving  eastward,  westward,  north-  or  southward.  The 
moutb  being  joinod  to  Ilea  von,  Heaven  must  follow  it.  Whenever 
tlio  month  moves,  \he  entire  Heaven  must  shift  its  place  alsn,  uiul 
it  is  not  only  where  tlic  tem|n'st  rag,'s,  that  Heaven  follows  thv 
liioveiiHMits  of  its  mouth. 

Aud  w  ho  is  it,  wliom  we  ht'lievo  to  be  angry?  The  Spirit 
of  Heaven  or  the  dark  blue  sky  ？  If  we  say,  the  Spirit  of  Heaven, 
an  angry  spirit  can  give  no  sound,  and,  if  we  say,  the  dark  blue 
sky,  its  body  cannot  lu'come  angry,  lor  anger  ri'imiros  a  moutli. 

Heaven  and  Eartl»  are  like  liushaiul  and  witV,  (hoy  are  fatlior 
aud  mother  of  mankind.  Xmv,  K-t  a  son  havr  commit  ted  a  fault, 
and  liis  fatlitT  in  a  fit  of  passion  beat  him  to  death,  would  not 
his  mother  wet-p  for  liim?  Wlion  Heaven  in  its  wratli  slays  a  man, 
Earth  ought  also  to  cry  over  liim,  but  oiu*  only  hears  of  1 1  raven's 
anger,  and  never  of  Earth's  crying.  If  Kartli  canuor  nhed  tears. 
Heaven  cannot  be  angry  either. 

Furt liermore,  anger  must  \ui\c  its  counter|)art  in  joy.  Men 
have  hidden  faults,  but  they  liav«'  also  latent  virtues.  Hidden  faults 
in  a  man  call  forth  Heaven's  anger,  which  prompts  it  to  kill  liim, 
but  in  case  of  latent  virtues  Heaven  "uglit  also  to  requite  liim 
with  good.  If  the  rolling  sound  is  ivganlcd  as  an  expression  of 
Heaven's  anger,  IleavciJ,  when  jilcascd,  ouglit  to  give  a  hearty  laugh. 

Men  are  pleased  or  angry,  llicrclon'  thv  saint'  is  said  of  Iloavon. 
W (！  try  to  get  a  conception  of  Heaven  by  ascribing  human  (jualitics 
to  it.  Tlie  source  of  this  knowlcd^v  of  Heaven  is  man.  If  man 
would  feel  no  angt-r,  there  is  no  reason  t'itht'r,  wliy  Heaven  should. 
Since  our  knowledge  of  Heaven  is  derived  from  that  of  man,  human 
nature  in  its  entirety  must  be  tak«*n  as  basis.  A  man,  when  an<iry, 
breathes  heavily,  when  pleased,  ho  sin«>s  and  laughs.  We  mucli  less 
often  hear  of  Heaven's  joy,  than  of  its  a  rigor,  and  mucli  ruore 
seldom  see  it  reward,  than  punish.  Is  Heaven  always  irritated 
and  never  content?  Docs  it  mete  out  puni.shmoiit  pretty  freely, 
but  is  rather  sparing  of  its  rewards?  How  does  its  an^cr  and  vin- 
dictiveness  becomt!  manifest,  whereas  there  are  no  instaiicos  of  its 
joy  and  liberality.' 

When  liglituing  strikes,  it  hits  a  tree,  damages  a  lionso.  and 
eventually  kills  a  man.  This  is  IooUimI  upon  as  I  leaven's  angor.  Hut 
uot  un frequently  a  tliuti(ler-cla|)  is  without  c licet,  cai^iny;  no  (latnag<% 
and  destroying  no  liumaii  litV.  I )< >«*s  【l<'av«'n  in  hmcIi  a  (，as'、  indulge 
in  useless  aiii^er?  A  so\  t'n'i^n's  joy  and  anger  arc  n<»t  in  vain.  lU'ing 
pleased  or  angry,  lie  will  crrtaiuly  rrwanl  or  puriisii.  Useless  anger 
without  [ninislnncnl  u oulil  bv  uiiln'roiniiifr  in  llt  u\  en.    Doing  some- 


Digitized  by  Google 


288 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


thing  unseeming,  it  would  lose  its  dignity  thereby.  That  is  not 
Heaven's  way. 

The  writers  on  government  hold  that  (； old  and  heat  coincide 
with  joy  and  anger.  When  the  sovereign  is  pleased,  ths  weatlier 
is  mild,  when  l»e  is  angry,  it  is  cold.  Then  on  the  day  of  a  thunder- 
storm the  teinptTature  ought  to  be  cold. 

Before  Han  Kao  Tsu  was  born.  Dame  Liux  wliilt1  sleeping  on 
the  bauks  of  a  big  pond  had  intercourse  with  a  spirit  in  her  dream. 
At  that  time  there  was  thunder  and  lightning,  and  a  great  dark- 
ness. Heaven  was  just  tlion  emitting  its  fluid,  and  ought  to  have 
been  pleased,2  wliy  was  it  irritated  and  thundering? 

If  striking  and  breaking  is  construed  as  a  sign  of  Heaven's 
anger,  and  not  striking  or  breaking  as  a  sign  of  Heaven's  joy,  tlie 
rolling  noise  would  not  be  appropriate  in  both  cases.3  Man  ex- 
presses joy  and  anger  by  difFerent  sounds,  if  Heaven  used  tiie  same 
sound  for  two  difFerent  purposes,  there  would  be  a  fundamental 
(lid'erence  between  him  und  man.  IVom  what  circumstanw  tlun 
could  we  infer  Heaven's  anger? 

To  give  other  persons  impure  things  to  eat  is  a  small  offence. 
For  Heaven  to  chastise  such  small  oflendei-s  in  person  with  its 
own  most  precious  body,  would  be  derogatory  to  its  majesty. 
Exalted  persons  do  not  punish  personally,  thort'fore  does  the  ein- 
poror  not  execute  the  criminals  with  his  own  hand.  Heaven  is 
more  exalted  tlian  the  emperor.  If  it  punislied  small  misdemeanours 
itself,  its  virtue  would  be  iniVrior  to  that  of  the  emperor. 

Heaven's  sentiments  must  be  similar  to  man's  feelings.  Wlu'n 
a  prince  punishes  tlie  wicked,  lie  upon  first  hearing  of  their  crime, 
boconies  i'urious  aiul  condems  tln-m,  but  when  it  comes  to  taking 
their  liv*-s,  lie  conimiseratos  and  pities  them.  Therefore  the  Anal^cls 
say  "  When  you  have  found  ("it  tlie  truth,  be  grieved  and  pity 
them,  and  (\o  not  feci  joy.  "4  ('/ton  was  utterly  depraved,  yet,  when 
\Yu  Wane/  was  going  to  put  him  to  deatli,  he  deplored  and  pitied 
him.  Tli us  in  tlie  S/iukiny  he  says:—"  1  coniinauded  the  wild  tribes, 
but  1  am  sorry  lor  you."5    A  sovereign  puts  the  bad  to  deatli. 


1  The  mother  of  the  emperor  Kao  Tsu.    Cf.  p.  177. 

2  Heaven  as  a  spirit  was  just  then  ciigctidering  Han  Kao  Tsu,  the  Son  of 
Heaven. 

3  In  the  case  of  joy  as  well  as  of  anger. 

4  Amdtcts  XIX,  19.  The  criminal  judge  i  any  Fu  having  consulted  the  ph'do- 
sopher  Tw'ng  TV  on  the  duties  of  Iiis  office,  tlie  latter  advised  him  to  pity  the  of- 
fenders, whose  misdeeds  were  perhaps  a  cousccjuence  of  bad  ndmiiiistratioii. 

5  This  passage  is  nut  to  l>e  tumid  in  our  text  of  tlie  Hhukiny. 


igitized  by  Google 


On  Tlmnder  and  Lightning. 


289 


but  with  a  feeling  of  commiseration,  whereas  Heaven  in  punishing 
misdemeanours,  strikes  people  dead  in  its  rage.  Thus  Heaven 
would  be  less  merciful  than  man. 

Rain  is  believed  to  be  a  fluid  emitted  by  Heaven.  Put  forth 
by  Heaven,  it  becomes  moistened,  and  gives  the  rain.  When  the 
rain  saturates  everything,  one  speaks  of  timely  showers.  Unless 
he  be  in  good  humour,  man  does  not  show  kindness,  and  unless 
it  be  pleased,  Heaven  does  not  pour  clown  rain.  If  thunder  be 
taken  for  an  expression  of  Heaven's  auger,  then  rain  must  be  a 
sign  of  its  joy.  When  there  is  thunder,  it  is  always  accompanied 
by  rain.  One  must  suppose,  therefore,  that  Heaven  is  at  the  same 
time  grumbling  and  laughing.  A  sovereign  does  not  mete  out  re- 
wards and  punishinents  on  the  same  day.  Should  Heaven's  anger 
and  joy  coincide  in  time,  Heaven  and  man  would  not  be  in  harmony, 
and  their  ways  of  rewarding  and  punishing  quite  different.  More- 
over, anger  and  joy  are  both  fitful.  To  fly  into  a  fit  of  passion 
out  of  disgust  at  man's  conduct,  to  punish  him  for  his  offence, 
and,  in  doing  so,  to  be  guided  by  passion,  would  be  unwortly  of 
Heaven. 

Regarding  a  thunderstorm  in  winter,  people  assert  that  the 
Yang  fluid  has  lost  its  force.  When  it  thunders  in  spring,  they 
say,  it  comes  out,  hut  when  there  is  a  tempest  in  summer,  instead 
of  owning  that  then  the  fluid  has  its  greatest  force,  they  speak  of 
Heaven's  anger.    Of  course  that  is  nothing  but  idle  talk. 

Man  is  a  creature  between  Heaven  and  Kartli.  Other  creatures 
are  likewise  creatures.  What  other  creatures  eat  and  drink,  Heaven 
does  not  know,  and  it  should  be  aware  of  what  man  eats  and 
drinks?  All  beings  are  to  Heaven  like  children.  The  kindness 
and  love  of  father  and  mother  to  all  their  children  arc  tlie  same. 
Why  then  does  Heaven  watch  the  nobler  and  more  intelligeut 
being  so  closely,  but  takes  no  lieed  of  the  humbler  and  less  gifted 
ones?  Why  does  it  pry  into  all  that  man  does,  but  ignores  other 
creatures? 

Dogs  and  pigs  eat  human  excrements,  yet  Heaven  does  not 
kill  them  for  that.  Provided  that  Heaveu  restricts  only  man  on 
account  of  his  superiority,  then,  if  rats  contaminate  his  drink  or 
food,  and  man  unwittingly  eat  it  by  mistake,  Heaven  does  not 
destroy  the  rats.  If  Heaven  can  pardon  the  rats,  it  cau  do  the 
same  for  man.  Man  may  by  mistake  give  others  impure  things  to 
eat,  aud  those  unaware  of  it,  may  eat  them.  But  they  will  never 
offer  rotten  things  on  purpose.  Should  they  do  so,  the  others 
would  not  take  them. 

Lun-Heng.  I 'J 


Digitized  by  Google 


'細 


Lnn-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


The  Empress  Lfl  Hou 1  cut  off  Lady  Ch'ts  hands,  tore  out 
her  eyes,  and  placed  her  in  a  privy  as  a  human  swine.  Then  she 
called  people,  and  showed  them  her  victim.  All  felt  sick  at  heart. 
Wheu  the  emperor  //'"•  Ti  saw  her,  lie  fell  sick,  and  did  not  rise 
again.2  Lil  Hou  acted  on  purpose,  but  Heaven  did  not  punish  her. 
If  on  the  other  hand  Heaven  strikes  people  dead  for  a  mere  in- 
advertence without  mercy  or  regard  for  the  faults,  its  government 
is  tyrannical. 

When  men  eat  something  impure,  they  do  not  discover  it 
by  the  taste.  If  they  feel  it,  after  having  swallowed  it,  they  call 
it  a  pollution  of  their  bowels.  When  Lady  Clii  was  put  into  the 
cess-pool,  her  wliole  body  was  disgracefully  soiled,  which  is  notliing 
else  than  impurity,  for  the  body  does  not  differ  from  the  bowels. 
To  care  for  the  intestines,  but  disregard  the  body,  to  resent  im- 
purity, but  not  to  feel  the  afore-mentioned  horrible  disgrace,  would 
not  be  like  Heaveu. 

The  news  that  anybody  lias  eaten  something  unclean  does 
not  disturb  people's  minds,  whereas  all  that  saw  Lady  C/ii  felt 
sick  at  heart.  Man  being  hurt,  Heaven  must  feel  pity  too.  Com- 
miserating Lady  Cfii,  it  must  hate  Lil  Hon.  Notwithstanding,  when 
Lil  Hou  died,  she  was  not  struck  by  a  thunderbolt. 

The  Taoist  Liu  Ch  un  made  a  fool  of  the  king  of  Ch  u,  Ying, 
and  caused  him  to  eat  some  dirty  stuff.  Liu  Cliun  died  later  on, 
but  it  needed  no  lightning  to  make  hira  die. 

In  tlie  6th  mouth  of  summer  of  the  year  79  a.d.  Chin  Chuan 
of  K  uei-chi3  was  killed  by  lightning.  Of  the  sheep  which  he  used 
for  his  daily  meals,  five  died  together  witli  him.  What  hidden 
faults  had  these  animals,  that  the  lightning  killed  them? 

Boatmen  sometimes  pollute  a  stream  up-river,  while  otlier  people 
drink  its  water  down-river.  Yet  the  boatmen  do  not  die  by  lightning. 

The  Spirit  of  Heaven  dwells  in  heaven  just  us  a  king  in  his 
residence.    A  king  lives  behind  many  gates,  therefore  the  Spirit  of 

1  The  first  wife  of  Han  Kao  Tsu,  who  nsurped  the  imperial  power,  and  reigned 
under  her  own  name  against  all  custom  from  187  -179  b.c.  Her  son,  the  Emperor 
Hui  Ti,  whose  nominal  reign  lasted  from  194-187  b.c,  was  nothing  but  a  puppet  in 
tier  hands.  Lu  Hou  was  a  fiend  in  humau  shape,  who  liad  always  some  poison  ready 
for  her  enemies.  One  of  her  first  acts,  after  she  came  to  power,  was  to  wreak  her 
vengeance  on  her  rival,  Lady  Ch  i,  a  concubine  of  Han  h'uo  Tm,  who  had  attempted 
to  have  Iicr  own  son  made  lieir-apparent  in  place  of  Hui  Ti,  the  son  of  Lu  Hou, 
Hui  Ti,  a  very  kiud-lieartcd,  but  weak  sovereign  did  all  in  his  power  to  shield  his 
half-brother  from  tlie  wrath  of  his  mother,  who  poisoned  him  all  the  same. 

， Tli  is  story  is  abridged  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  9，  p.  3. 

s  A  city  in  Chekiang. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


291 


Heaven  must  stay  in  some  secluded  place  likewise.  As  the  king  has 
liis  palaces  and  halls,  Heaven  also  has  the  T'ai-uei,  T$e-hmgy  Ihilan- 
ymn  and  Win^cliang  mansions.1 

A  king  being  far  away  from  men  does  not  know  their  occult 
crimes.  How  could  the  Spirit  of  Heaven  in  his  four  palaces  see 
the  secret  misdeeds  of  men?  If  a  king  hears  of  the  faults  of  his 
subjects,  he  learns  it  through  others.  If  Heaven  becomes  cognizant 
of  the  crimes  of  men,  it  must  have  it  from  its  angels.  In  case 
the  spirits  are  Heaven's  informants  as  to  crimes,  it  must  also 
entrust  the  spirits  with  retributive  justice.  Such  bring  the  case, 
the  so-called  auger  of  Heaven  is  not  that  of  Heaven,  but  of  the 
spirits. 

A  king  inflicts  capital  punisliment  in  autumn,2  Heaven  kills 
in  summer.  Thus  the  king  in  meting  out  justice,  does  not  observe 
the  time  of  Heaven.  As  Heaven's  anointed  lie  should  in  executions 
also  imitate  the  example  of  majrstic  Heaven.  Heaven  chooses 
summer  for  killing,  wlioreas  the  king  executes  in  autumn.  Heaven 
and  man  are  thus  at  variance,  which  would  never  do  for  Heaven's 
deputy. 

Some  people  will  argue  that  giving  impure  things  to  eat  or 
drink  is  a  great  crime  before  Heaven,  which  in  killing  the  culprit 
does  not  pay  attention  to  time.3  Great  crimes  in  the  eyes  of  kings 
are  liigli-treason,  rebellion,  and  lawlessness,  whereas  Fleaven  con- 
siders ttie  offering  of  unrloan  tilings  to  others  as  food  or  drink  as 
a  serious  offence.  丁 lie  criinos  condemned  by  Heaven  are  of  dif- 
ferent gravity.  Were  the  light  and  the  serious  ones  all  equally 
dealt  with,  the  king  would  have  to  imitate  Heaven's  government, 
and  put  to  death  every  one,  who  had  given  others  unclean  things 
to  eat  or  drink.  When  the  holy  emperors  were  ruling,  they  had 
not  such  a  penalty.  That  would  mean  that  the  holy  emperors 
were  remiss,  and  had  forgotten  this  punishment.4 

It  may  be  said  that  the  ghosts  liave  power  over  what  is  se- 
cret, and  that  a  king's  sway  extends  over  what  is  public  only. 
Secret  faults  are  wrapt  in  darkness  and  invisible  to  man,  therefore 
spirits  must  be  employed  to  watch  over  them.   I  reply,  there  being 


1  Names  of  constellations. 

2  In  China  the  regular  executions  take  place  in  autumn. 

3  It  destroys  tho  guilty  on  the  spot,  and  docs  not  delay  judgment  until 
aatamn. 

4  A  deductio  ad  a''s"rdum  from  a  Chinese  point  of  view,  for  the  holy  emperors, 
i'ao,  S/nm,  and  the  like,  were  perfect,  and  could  not  have  omitted  to  punish  serious 
misdeeds. 


19- 


292 


Lan-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


not  only  one  secret  fault,  why  are  not  all  the  offenders  put  to 
death  ？  To  fix  upon  one  single  offence  would  not  be  a  just  retribu- 
tion for  liidden  sins. 

Heaven  veuts  its  anger,  before  the  sun  returns,  and  an  out- 
burst of  human  ire  takes  less  than  the  time  one  needs  to  turn 
round  upon  one's  heels.'  However,  secret  crimes  of  men  often 
become  manifest  in  winter  and  not  exclusively  in  summer.  If  he 
who  misconducts  himself  in  winter,  is  not  struck  by  thunder  forth- 
with, but  must  wait  till  summer,  Heaven's  wrath  cannot  be  quicker 
than  a  revolution  of  the  sun. 

When  painters  represent  tlie  thunder,  it  is  like  so  many  joiued 
drums,  heaped  together.  Tbey  also  paint  a  man  having  the  sem- 
blance of  an  athlete  and  call  him  "  the  Thunderer "  {Lei  Kung). 
With  his  loft  haud  tliey  give  liim  joined  drums  to  pull,  in  his 
right  hand  he  brandishes  a  hammer,  as  though  he  were  going  to 
strike.  It  means  that  the  rolling  suuud  of  thunder  is  produced  by 
the  knocking  together  of  the  united  drums,  aud  tliat  the  sudden 
crashing  noise  is  the  blow  of  the  hammer.  When  a  man  is  killed, 
he  is  struck  with  the  drums  aud  the  hammer  at  tlje  same  time. 

People  also  believe  in  this,  and  nobody  objects.  But  if  wc 
get  at  tlic  bottom  of  it,  we  find  that  these  pictures  are  pure  fic- 
tions. Thunder  is  either  a  sound  or  a  fluid.  How  can  a  sound 
or  a  fluid  brandish  a  hammer,  or  pull  drums,  and  have  the  shape 
of  joined  drums?  If  the  thunder  ran  really  swing  or  pull  these 
things,  it  must  be  a  creature.  That  which,  when  knocked  together, 
produces  sounds,  can  he  either  a  drum  or  a  bell.  Should  tlie  roll- 
ing sound  be  produced  by  drums  or  bells ？  In  that  case,  bells  and 
drums  could  not  hang  free  in  the  air,  they  would  require  a  frame 
with  vertical  and  cross-beams.  Suspended  between,  they  could  be 
sounded.  Now,  the  bells  and  drums  ！ lave  nothing  to  hang  upon, 
and  the  feet  of  the  Thunderer  nothing  to  walk  upon,  how  tlien 
should  the  thunder  be  produced  ？ 

Somebody  might  object  that  lor  this  very  reason  there  must 
be  a  spirit,  for,  if  in  order  to  produce  thumkr  a  frame  were  rc- 
quireil,  or  a  support  for  the  feet,  it  would  be  quite  human,  and 
by  no  means  spirit-like. 

I  hold  tliat  spirits  are  diflTuse  and  incorporeal.  Departing  or 
cominor  in  tliey  need  n'，  nperture,  uor  have  they  any  hold  above  or 
below.  'I  horefore  one  calls  them  spirits.  Now  the  Thunderer  lias 
a  body,  and  lor  the  thunder  there  are  instruments,  how  can  he  be 


This  seems  to  be  ai>  old  adage. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


2WA 


deemed  a  spirit?  If  the  Thunderer  were  incorporeal,  his  semblaDi-c 
could  not  be  drawn,  and,  if  he  possesses  a  body,  he  does  not 
deserve  the  name  of  a  spirit. 

People  talk  of  the  dragon  spirit  rising  to  heaven.  But  who- 
ever thoroughly  examines  the  question,  discredits  this  idea.  Men 
sometimes  sec  the  shape  of  a  dragon,  and  owing  to  this  circum- 
stauce  they  paint  the  sliape  of  a  dragon  rising  to  heaven.  The 
best  proof  that,  as  a  fact,  there  is  no  spirit  is,  that  it  can  be 
pictorially  represented. 

My  opponent  will  argue:  "  Men  also  see  apparitions  of  ghosts. 
Are  they  not  spirits?  "  I  say:  "If  men  see  gliosts  sometimes,  has 
anybody  already  seen  the  Thunderer?  Gliosts  are  called  spirits, 
but  they  walk  about  on  earth  like  men.  The  Thunderer,  however, 
does  not  rest  his  head  in  heaven,  nor  walk  on  earth  with  his  feet. 
How  can  he,  therefore,  be  a  thunderer? ，， 

All  flying  creatures  have  wings.  Those  who  can  fly  without 
wings  are  styled  genii.  In  representing  the  forms  of  genii  men 
give  them  wings.  Provided  the  Thunderer  is  like  the  genii,  he 
ought  to  have  wings  equally.  If,  in  case  tlie  Thunderer  does  not 
fly,  the  painters  pretend  that  he  can  fly,  they  are  wrong,  and  if 
he  really  could  fly,  but  had  no  wings,  it  would  be  wrong  likewise. 
Thus  the  pictures  of  the  Thunderer's  outward  appearance,  made 
by  painters,  are  merely  fancy  work. 

Those  who  argue  about  •  thunder  aver  that  it  is  Heaven's 
angry  snorting,  whereas  those  who  sketch  it,  contend  that  the 
Thunderer  in  his  anger  pulls  the  joined  drums.  If  it  is  really  as 
the  critics  say,  the  painters  are  wrong,  and  if  they  are  right,  tlie 
critics  must  be  in  error.  The  two  classes  are  antagonistic.  If  both 
their  views  were  taken  as  genuine,  there  would  he  no  difference 
of  right  and  wrong,  and  in  default  of  that,  no  real  right  and  wrong. 
Doubts  would  not  be  settled,  and  fallacies  would  triumph. 

The  Liki  speaks  of  a  goblet  with  tlie  thunder  carved  upon 
it.'  One  thunder  rushes  forth,  tlie  other  reverts,  one  is  coiled  up, 
tlie  other  stretched  forth.  Tlieir  friction  would  give  a  sound.  They 
look  as  if  they  were  colliding,  piled  up  in  a  grotesque  and  phan- 
tastic  way.  This  form  represents  the  thunder.  When  through 
friction  the  air  breaks,  there  is  a  rolling  sound,  the  sound  of  friction. 


1  Neither  the  Liki  nor  the  (  hmt-li  contains  such  a  passage,  as  far  as  I  conld 
make  out.  On  the  old  sacrificial  bronze  vases,  called  t 讓 尊 ― goblets,  clouds 
and  thunders  '■•  e.  coiled  up  clouds  were  represented.  The  thunder  ornament  is  the 
Chinese  Meander.  Sjiecimens  of  these  goblets  can  be  seen  in  the  Po-ku-fu-lu  chap.  7. 


294 


Lun-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


A  sudden  crash  is  the  sound  of  the  shooting  forth  of  the  air. 
When  tliis  shooting  air  hits  a  man,  he  dies. 

In  fact  thunder  is  nothing  else  than  the  exploding;  solar  fluid. 
How  do  we  know?— In  the  first  month  the  Yang  fluid  begins  to 
be  roused,  consequently  we  have  the  first  thunder  during  the  first 
moon.  In  the  fifth  mouth  Yang  is  at  its  cynosure,  therefore  at 
that  time  thunder  rapidly  follows  upon  thunder.  Iu  autumn  and 
winter  Yang  declines,  therefore  thunder  ceases  during  these  sea- 
sons. Io  the  midst  of  summer  the  sun  reigns  supreme,  but  the, 
Ym  fluid  oucleavours  to  gt't  the  upperhand.  In  this  dispute  of  tlie 
Yang  and  tlie  Yin  fluids  it  corars  to  frictions,  and  these  frictions 
lead  to  explosions  and  shooting,  which  are  destructive.  A  man 
struck  by  these  forces  is  killed,  a  tree  split,  and  a  house  demolished. 
A  person  under  a  tree  or  in  a  house  may  also  by  chance  be  hit 
and  killed. 

To  test  the  justness  of  this  statement  take  a  basin  full  of 
water,  and  throw  it  on  a  tire,  used  for  melthig  purposes.  The 
vapour  will  explode  with  a  puff  like  the  sound  of  thunder.  Should 
any  one  be  too  near,  his  body  will  be  burned.  Heaven  and  oartli 
are  like  a  great  furnace,  the  Yang  fluid  is  an  immense  fire,  clouds 
and  rain  are  huge  masses  of  water.  When  tlicy  struggle,  explode 
and  shoot,  the  eflTocts  must  be  most  violent,  and  a  man  hit  and 
injured  cannot  but  die. 

When  founders  melt  iron,  they  make  a  mould  of  earth,  into 
which  the  liquid  iron  runs  down.  Else  it  bursts  out,  flows  over, 
aud  spurts.  Hitting  a  man's  body,  it  burns  his  skin.  Tht'  fiery 
Yang  fluid  is  not  only  as  hot  as  liquid  iron,  the  exploding  Yin 
fluid  has  not  merely  the  wetness  of  earth  and  clay,  und  wlien 
the  Yang  fluid  hits  a  man,  it  does  not  simply  cause  the  pain  of 
burning. 

Thunder  is  fire.  A  man  burned  by  this  fluid  must  show  traces 
of  it.  If  those  traces  of  burning  look  like  written  characters,  people 
seeing  them  use  to  say  that  Heaven  lias  written  the  man  a  guilt 
to  make  it  known  to  the  wliole  world.  This  is  also  unreasonable. 

If  Heaven  destroys  men  witli  its  tli under,  after  they  have 
perpetrated  their  misdeeds,  he  ought  to  make  tlieir  wickedness  quite 
public,  with  a  view  to  frightening  for  the  future,  and  write  tlie  charac- 
ters clearly,  but  not  quite  indistinctly,  as  it  does.  When  the  "  Plan  " 
came  out  of  the  Yellow  River,1  and  the  "  Scroll  "  emerged  from 

1  Tlie  "  Plan appeared  to  the  Emperor  Huang  TV  in  the  Yellow  River. 
A  big  fish  carried  it  on  its  back.  Huang  Ti  received  the  Plan,  which  consUted  of 
a  combination  of  symbolical  linea  and  diagrams  like  the  Fa-kua. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


295 


the  Lo、、  Heaven  and  Earth  produced  them  for  men  to  read  and 
take  note  of.  The  writing  on  people  killed  by  thunder  is  also 
Heaveu's  work.    Why  is  it  so  difficult  to  understand? 

Let  us  assume  that  the  human  skin  is  not  fit  to  be  written 
upon.  The  wife  of  Duke  Hut  of  Lu*  Ch'ung  Tse  was  daughter  to 
Duke  Wu  of  Sung,  When  she  was  born,  she  had  a  writing  on 
her  palm  to  the  effect  that  she  was  to  be  duchess  of  Lu.  The 
writing  was  distinct  and  intelligible.  Therefore  Ch'ung  Tse  was 
married  to  Lu.  The  thunder's  handwriting  not  being  clear,  it  cannot 
serve  as  a  deterrent  for  the  future.  Ergo  the  burnt  spots  are  not 
characters  engTaved  by  Heaven. 

Sometimes  people  exaggerate  things  that  really  exist,  some- 
times they  invent  things  that  have  no  real  basis  at  all.  Imposed 
upon  by  fallacies,  they  indulge  in  fabricating  wonders  and  miracles 
as  the  following  argumeuts  will  prove: ― 

1.  Thunder  is  tire.  When  a  man  dies  struck  by  thunder,  one 
discovers  upon  examining  his  body,  if  the  liead  be  bit,  that  the 
hair  is  singed,  and  if  the  body  be  struck,  that  the  skin  is  charred. 
Coming  near  the  body,  one  scents  the  smell  of  burning.  2.  Taoist 
experimentalists  bold  that  a  stone  heated  by  a  thunder-clap,  becomes 
red.  If  it  be  thrown  into  a  well,  the  stone  being  burning  hot,  the 
well  cool,  an  explosion  ensues  with  a  loud  detonation  like  thunder. 
3.  When  somebody  takes  cold,  the  cold  fluid  enters  his  stomach. 
The  stomach  being  as  a  rule  warm  within,  the  warmth  and  the 
cold  struggle  together,  and  the  exploding  air  gives  a  th under-like 
sound.  4.  In  a  thunder-storm  brilliant  lightnings  appear  every  now 
and  then  like  the  glares  of  big  fires.  5.  When  the  lightning  strikes, 
it  often  bums  man's  houses  and  buildings,  or  grass  and  trees. 

Those  who  declare  thunder  to  be  fire  have  these  five  argu- 
ments, those  who  prentend  that  thunder  is  Heaven's  anger,  not  a 
single  one.  Therefore  this  latter  assertion  is  without  any  foundation. 

However,  it  might  be  objected  that  there  is  a  passage  in  the 
Analects  to  tlie  e fleet  that,  when  tliunder  followed  thunder,  and  the 
storm  raged,  Confucius  used  to  be  deeply  impressed.4   The  Liki  says, 


1  The  "  Scroll "  was  carried  by  a  dragon-horse,  which  rose  from  the  waters 
of  the  Lo,  a  tributary  of  the  Yellow  River,  at  fa  //."•、•  time.  From  the  mystic  signs 
on  this  "  Scroll  ，'  the  emperor  is  reported  to  have  derived  the  Eight  Diagrams  and 
the  first  system  of  written  characters,  which  took  the  place  of  the  knotted  cords, 
quipos,  then  in  use. 

1  767-721  b.c. 

' 764-746  b.c. 

4  Quoted  from  AnutecU  X,  16. 


ized  by  Google 


290 


Lun-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 


" when  a  strong  wind  blows,  and  the  thunder-claps  quickly  folbw 
each  other,  and  rain  falls  in  torrents,  a  superior  man  will  be  deeply 
moved.  Though  it  be  night,  he  will  rise,  don  his  clothes  and  cap. 
and  sit  up  " 1  in  awe  of  Heaven's  anger,  fearing  lest  its  punishment 
sliouUl  reach  him.  If  thunder  were  not  the  expression  of  Heaven's 
anger,  nor  its  striking  a  punishment  of  the  guilty,  wliy  should  a 
good  man  be  frightened  by  thunder,  put  on  his  oHicial  robe,  and 
sit  straight? 

The  Master a  means  that  the  relation  of  Heaven  to  man  is 
similar  to  that  of  father  and  son.  The  father  being  moved,  the 
son  canuot  remain  indifferent.  Therefore,  when  Heaven  is  moved, 
man  must  be  likewise.  Being  in  harmony  with  Heaven,  he  proves 
that  he  does  not  act  in  opposition  to  it. 

Man  suddenly  hearing  a  dog  bark  outside  the  house,  will  be 
startled,  aud  with  trembling  limbs  harkeD  to  find  out,  what  it  means. 
How  much  more  so,  wlien  he  hears  Heaven  assuming  an  extraordinary 
voice  like  the  noise  made  by  the  quick  rolling  of  lieavy  carts! 

The  remark  in  the  Analects  and  the  observation  of  the  Liki 
both  refer  to  the  wise  man.  The  wise  man  displays  the  utmost 
care  in  all  his  doings  and  knows  that  he  lias  no  guilt,  just  like 
sun  and  moon,  which,  when  eclipsed,  have  not  clandestinely  given 
impure  food  to  men.  Examining  his  heart,  he  feels  no  fear,  where- 
fore should  he  be  afraid  of  tlmnder?  If  he  is  not  afraid,  his  ex- 
citement can  be  no  proof  of  Heaven's  anger,  because  he  fears  nothing 
for  himself.  Should  be  really  be  afraid  of  thunder,  even  that  would 
not  suffice  to  prove  the  punishment  of  hidden  crimes,  for  people 
struck  by  ligli tiling  are  mostly  quite  innocent.  The  wise  man  ap- 
prehends that  he  might  be  hit  by  chance.  Therefore  he  is  anxious 
and  alarmed.  But  this  alarm  of  the  wise  man  cannot  be  put  for- 
ward to  demonstrate  that  thunder  is  Heaven's  anger.  It  shows, 
on  the  contrary,  that  thunder  strikes  at  random.  Because  it  hits 
at  random,  and  does  not  punish  the  guilty,  people  are  afraid.  If 
thunder  actually  punished  the  guilty,  the  wicked  ought  to  stand 
in  awe,  and  the  wise  had  no  cause  for  apprehensions. 

The  king  of  Sung  asked  T  ang  Yang  saying  "  I  have  killed  a 
great  number  of  people,  yet  all  the  officials  are  still  quite  fearless. 
What  is  the  reason? " 

Tang  Yang  replied  ： ― "  Those  that  Your  Highness  has  punished 
were  exclusively  bad  characters.    If  the  bad  are  called  to  account, 


Quoted  from  the  Uki  Book  VI  Tii-tsao  (L^-ye,  Sacred  Booka Vol.  XXVIII,  p.  5). 
Confuciui  in  the  passage  quoted  from  the  Analects. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Thunder  and  Lightning. 


25»7 


why  should  the  good  be  frightened?  If  Your  Highness  wishes  all 
the  officials  to  be  in  awe,  the  best  way  is  to  make  no  distinction 
between  good  and  bad,  and  chastise  them  all  occasionally.  Then 
all  the  officialdom  will  be  afraid." ' 

The  king  followed  his  advice,  and  all  the  functionaries  became 
frightened,  whereupon  the  king  of  Sung  turned  very  angry.  Owing 
to  the  indiscriminate  punishments  of  the  king  of  Sung,  the  whole 
people  of  Sung  got  greatly  alarmed.  Because  thunder  and  lightning 
strike  indiscriminately,  a  wise  man  becomes  agitated.  His  alarm  is 
like  the  great  fright  of  the  kingdom  of  Sung. 

1  Qnoted  from  Htin  T«e. 


Digitized  by  Google 


29S 


Lun-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 
On  Poison  (Yen-tu). 

Sometimes  the  following  question  is  considered :  —  Between 
heaven  and  earth  there  are  the  ten  thousand  beings  witli  their 
characteristic  nature.  In  the  animal  kingdom  we  find  adders  and 
vipers,  bees  and  scorpions,  whicli  are  poisonous.  When  their  hite 
or  sting  has  hurt  a  human  body,  the  sickness  whicli  they  cause 
must  be  most  carefully  treated,  for  without  timely  help,  the  virus 
spreads  through  tlie  whole  body.  In  the  vegetable  kingdom  we 
have  croton  oil  beans  and  、vil《l  doliclios,  wliich,  when  eaten,  cause 
a  stomach-ache,  and  in  large  doses  kill  a  man.  Wliat  manner  of 
fluid  have  thesr  created  beings  received  from  heaven ？  The  ten 
thousand  beings,  when  created,  are  endowed  with  the  original  fluid. 
Is  there  any  poison  in  the  original  fluid? 

Poison  is  the  hot  air  of  the  sun;  when  it  touches  a  man, 
he  becomes  empoisoned.  If  we  eat  something  which  causes  us 
such  a  pain  in  tlie  stomacli,  tliat  we  cannot  endure  it,  that  whioli 
proves  so  unendurable  is  called  poison.  The  fiery  air  of  the  sun 
regularly  produces  poison.  This  air  is  hot.  The  people  living  in 
the  land  of  tlie  sun  are  impetuous.  Tlie  moutlis  and  tongues  of 
these  impetuous  people  bt'coine  venomous.  Thus  the  inhabitants 
of  Ch  n  and  Yiieh  1  are  impetuous  and  passionate.  "When  they  talk 
with  others,  and  a  drop  of  their  saliva  happens  to  fly  against  their 
interlocutors,  the  arteries  of  tlie  latter  begin  to  swell  and  ulcerate. 

Tl"、  Soittliern  Circuit'2  is  a  very  hot  region.  When  the  people 
tliere  curse  a  treo,  it  withers,  and,  Avlien  fhey  spit  upon  a  bird, 
it  drops  down.  Wizards  are  all  able  to  make  people  ill  by  their 
prayers  as  well  as  to  avert  their  misfortunes.  They  hail  from 
Kfana-nan,3  and  arc  imbued  、vitli  the  hot  fluid.  Poison  is  the  fluid 
of  the  sun.  thiTpforc  it  burns  likp  lire,  wlien  somebody  is  aspersed 
by  it.    When  j)eo|)Ie  bitten  l»y  a  vij)er  cut  out  tlie  flesli,  as  some- 

1   Hukuang  and  Chfkiang. 
a  Hapei. 

5  The  country  south  of  the  Yanptse,  now  the  provinces  Kiangtu^  Kianggi, 
aud  Anhui. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Poison. 


299 


times  they  do,  and  put  it  on  the  ground,  it  burns  and  bubbles  up, 
which  shows  that  there  is  a  hot  fluid  in  it.  At  the  four  cardinal 
points  are  border-lands,  but  the  south-eastern  corner  alone  has 
broiling  hot  air,  which  always  comes  forth  in  Spring  and  Summer. 
In  Spring  and  Summer  the  sua  rises  in  the  south-eastern  corner, 
winch  is  the  proper  sphere  of  the  sun. 

When  the  air  of  other  things  enters  into  our  nose  or  eyes, 
tliey  do  not  feel  pain,  but  as  soon  as  fire  or  smoke  enter  into 
our  nose,  it  aches,  and,  wlien  tliey  enter  into  our  eyes,  they  pain 
us.  This  is  the  burning  of  the  hot  air.  Many  substances  can  be 
dissolved,  but  it  is  only  by  burning  fire  that  they  are  scorched. 

Eating  sweets  is  not  injurious  to  man,  but,  when  for  instance 
he  takes  a  little  too  much  honey,  he  lias  symptoms  of  poisoning. 
Honey  is  a  secretion  of  the  bee,  and  the  bee  is  an  insect  belonging 
to  the  Yang  fluid. 

If  a  man  without  having  hurt  himself  against  anything  in  his 
movements  feels  a  sudden  pain  in  his  body,  for  which  there  is  no 
apparent  reason,  and  if  those  parts  of  his  body  which  pain  him 
show  marks  of  flogging  so  to  speak,  he  suffers  from  lumbago. 
This  lumbago,  they  say,  is  caused  by  devils  who  arc  beating  the 
person.  Devils  are  supernatural  apparitions  produced  by  the  sun. 
If  the  disease  be  less  acute,  one  calls  it  sciatica,  and  uses  boaey 
and  cinnabar  to  cure  it.  Honey  and  cinnabar  are  substances  be- 
longing to  the  Yang  fluid.  This  cure  is  homeopathic.  As  an  anti- 
dote against  a  cold  one  uses  cold,  and  against  fever  one  uses  heat. 
！ Since  to  cure  sciatica  they  take  honey  and  cinnabar,  it  shows  us 
that  sciatica  is  the  eflTect  of  the  Yang  fluid  and  of  the  diflfusion  of 
a  poison. 

Poisonous  air  is  floating  between  heaven  and  earth.  When  a 
man  comes  into  touch  with  it,  his  face  begins  to  swell,  a  disease 
which  people  call  a  surirStroke. 

Men  who  have  seen  ghosts,  state  that  they  have  a  red  colour. 
The  supernatural  forre  of  tlie  sun  must,  of  course,  have  this  colour. 
Ghosts  are  burning  poison  ；  the  man  whom  they  assault,  must  die. 
Thus  did  Earl  Tu  shoot  King  Hsflan  of  Chou  dead.1  The  para- 
phernalia of  these  demons  of  death  are  like  the  fire  of  the  sun. 
The  bow  as  well  as  the  arrow  of  Tu  Po  were  both  red.  In  tlie 
south  they  term  poison  "  small  fox."  The  apparition  of  Karl  Tu 
had  a  bow  in  his  hand,  with  whicli  lie  Bhot.  The  solar  fluid  was 
kindled  simultaneously,  and,  when  it  was  thus  intensified,  it  shot. 


Cf.  p.  202. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I.nn-Heng:  C.  Physical . 


Therefore,  when  1"'  hit  the  king,  lie  seemed  provided  with  bow 
and  arrow. 

When  l»eat  is  pent  up,  and  the  temperature  increased,  the 
poison  in  the  blood  is  stirred  up.  Therefore  eating  the  liver  of  a 
race  horse  will  cans«>  a  man's  deatli,  tlie  fluid  pent  up  in  the  liver 
having  been  cliafed.  During  the  dog-days,  when  a  scorching  heat 
prevails,  people  tlie  by  insolation;  the  extreme  heat  has  been  turned 
into  poison.  We  perspire,  while  running,  near  a  stove,  in  the  sun- 
shine at  poon,  and,  when  we  are  feverish.  The  four  causes  have 
been  different,  but  they  all  engender  perepiratiou.  The  heat  is  the 
same,  and  it  has  been  equally  pent  up. 

Fire  is  a  phenomenon  of  the  sun.  All  croatod  beings  of  tlie 
world  are  filled  with  tl",  solar  fluid  and  after  their  creation  contain 
some  poison.  Reptiles  and  insects  possessing  tliis  poison  in  abund- 
ance become  vipers  and  adders,  bees  and  scorpions,  plants  become 
croton  seeds  and  wild  doliclios,  Bslies  become  porpoises  and  "  to- 
shu " 1  fish.  Consequently  men  eating  a  porpoise  liver  die,  and  the 
bite  of  a  "  to-shu "  is  venomous.  Fishes  and  birds  are  related, 
therefore  birds  can  fly,  and  fishes  too:  birds  lay  eggs,  and  fishes 
also.  Vipers,  adders,  bees,  aud  scorpions  are  all  oviparous  and  have 
a  similar  nature. 

Among  mankind  bad  characters  take  the  place  of  these  creatures. 
Their  mouths  do  miscliicf.  The  bad  men  of  the  world  are  imbued 
with  a  poisonous  fluid.  The  poison  of  the  wicked  living  in  the  land 
of  the  sun  is  still  more  virulent,  hence  the  curses  and  the  swearing 
of  the  people  of  southern  Ytleh  produce  such  wonderful  results. 

A  proverb  says,  "  31  any  mouths  melt  metal."  Tlie  mouth  is 
fire.  Fire  is  the  second  of  the  fiv'、  elements,  and  speorh  the  second 
of  the  five  actions.2  There  is  an  ox  act  correspondence  between 
speech  aud  fire,  therefore  in  speaking  of  the  melting  of  metal  one 
says  that  the  iiumtli  ;nul  the  tongue  melt  it.  They  do  not  apeak 
of  pulling  out  wood  and  burning  it,  but  expressly  refer  to  the 
melting  of  metal.  Metal  is  overcome  by  fire,  fire  and  mouth  belong 
to  the  same  class.3 

Medicinal  lierbs  do  not  grow  in  one  place  only.  Tai  Po  left 
his  country  and  went  to  Wu.*  The  melting  of  metal  dot's  not  take 

1  Kang-hi  quotes  this  passage,  but  does  not  say  what  kind  of  n  fish  the 
"/o-*A«  " ，多 银 is.  It  may  be  a  variety  of  the  ，htt,  which  seems  to  be  a  kind 
of  sturgeon. 

， Cf.  Shukwff  {Hung-fan)  Pt.  V,  Bk.  IV,  5-6. 

3  Another  instance  of  Chinese  symbolism,  which  they  mistake  for  science. 
*  Cf.  p.  120. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Poison. 


301 


place  in  one  foundry  alone.  People  speak  very  much  of  Tang-cJu 
in  CH u,、  The  warm  air  on  earth  has  its  regions.  One  dreads  to  go 
into  the  southern  sea,  for  the  secretary  falcon  lives  in  the  south,  and  he 
who  drinks  anything  that  has  been  in  contact  with  it,  must  die.* 

S/iSn  appertains  to  the  dragon  and  .sse  to  the  snake.  ShM 
and  ssen  are  placed  in  the  south-east.  The  dragon  is  poisonous, 
and  the  snake  venomous,  therefore  vipers  are  provided  with  sharp 
teeth,  and  dragons  with  an  indented  crust.  Wood  engenders  fire, 
and  fire  becomes  poison.  Hence  the  "  Green  Dragon  "  holds  the 
" Fire  Star  "  in  its  mouth.4 

Wild  dolichos  and  croton  seed  botli  contain  poison,  therefore 
the  dolichos  grows  in  the  south-east,  anil  croton  in  the  south-west. 
The  frequence  of  poisonous  things  depends  on  the  dryness  and  the 
humidity  of  the  soil,  and  the  strength  of  the  poison  is  influenced 
by  the  locality,  where  they  have  grown.  Snakes  are  like  fish, 
therefore  they  grow  in  the  grass  and  in  marshes.  liees  and  scorpions 
resemble  birds  and  are  born  in  houses  and  on  trees.  In  Kmng-pei^ 
the  land  is  dry;  consequently  bees  antl  scorpions  abound  there.  【11 
Kiang-nan  the  soil  is  wet,  hence  it  is  a  breeding  place  for  great 
numbers  of  snakes. 

Those  creatures  growing  in  high  and  dry  places  are  like  the 
male  principle.  The  virile  member  hangs  down,  therefore  bees  and 
scorpions  sting  with  their  tails."  The  creatures  living  in  low  and 
wet  places  resemble  tl»e  female  principle.  The  female  organ  is  soft 
and  extensible,  therefore  snakes  bite  with  their  mouths.7  Poison 
is  either  concealed  in  the  head  or  the  tail,  wlience  the  bite  or  the 
sting  becomes  venomous,  or  under  the  epidermis  so  that  the  eating 
causes  stomach-ache,  or  it  lies  hidden  in  the  lips  and  the  throat, 
so  that  the  movement  of  the  tongue  does  mischief.8 


1  A  place  in  Honan  celebrated  for  its  foundries.   Vid.  p.  377. 

， Chin         ―  secretary  falcon  has  become  a  synonym  for  poison. 

»  The  fifth  and  the  sixth  of  the  Twelve  Branches  (Duodenary  Cycle  of  symbols). 

4  The  "  Green  Dragon  "  is  the  qnadrant  or  the  division  of  the  28  solar  mansions 
occupying  the  east  of  the  sky.  The  "  Fire  Star  "  is  tho  Planet  Mart.  Mars  in  the 
qoadrant  of  the  *'  Greeu  Dragon "  forebodea  war  1.  e.  poison  ；  nothing  but  inane 
symbolism.    (Cf.  Shi-chi  cliap.  27,  p.  6  v.) 

' The  country  north  of  tlie  YungUe,  now  the  northeru  parts  of  the  provinces 
Kiangta  and  Anh'", 

•  Which  hang  down  likewise. 

7  Which  are  soft  and  extensible.— To  such  ineptitudes  even  tlie  most  elevated 
Chinese  minds  are  led  by  their  craze  of  .synibolisation. 

8  The  mischief  done  by  the  tonytip  in  speaking,  whirl)  is  not  only  compared 
to,  but  identified  with  poison. 


302 


Lun-HAng:  C.  Physical. 


The  various  poisons  are  all  grown  from  the  same  fluid,  and 
however  different  their  manifeatations,  internally  they  are  the  same. 
Hence,  wlien  a  man  dreams  of  fire,  it  is  explained  as  altercation, 
and,  when  he  sees  snakes  in  liis  dreams,  they  also  moan  conlention. 
Fire  is  an  emblem  of  the  mouth  and  the  tongue:  they  appear  in 
snakes  likewise,  whicli  belong  to  the  same  class,  have  sprung  from 
the  same  root,  and  are  imbued  with  the  same  fluid.  Tlius  lire  is 
equivalent  to  speed,  and  speech  to  bad  men.  When  bad  men  say 
strange  things,  it  is  at  the  instigation  of  their  mouths  and  tlieir 
tongues,  and  tlie  utterances  of  mouth  and  tongue  are  provoked  by 
tlie  influence  heaven  lias  exorcised  upon  tlie  persons  in  question. 
Consequently  the  second  of  the  tivo  actions  is  called  speech.  "  The 
objectionable  manifestation  of  speech  is  jiresemptuous  error,  sym- 
bolized by  constant  .sunshine."  1  Presmnptious  error  is  extravagant 
anrl  shining.  In  tlie  same,  manner  snakes  are  gaudily  ornamented. 
All  oruaiuents  originate  from  tlie  Yong^  wliicli  produces  them,  as  it 
were.  Sunshine  is  followed  by  talk,  wliicli  accounts  for  the  weird 
songs  so  often  heard.2 

The  magical  force  engenders  beauty,  but  the  beautiful  are 
very  often  vicious  and  dopraved.  The  mother  of  Shu  Hit3  was  a 
beauty.  Shu  Hsiang's 4  niotlx'r  knew  her,  and  would  not  allow  her 
to  go  to  the  chamber  of  her  husband.  Shu  Hsi/ing  remonstrated. 
" In  the  depths  of  mountains  and  in  vast  marshes  dragons  and 
snakes  really  grow,"  said  his  mother.  "  Slie  is  beautiful,  but  I 
am  afraid,  h'st  she  give  birtli  to  a  dragon  or  a  snake,  wliich  would 
bring  misliap  upon  you.5  You  are  of  a  poor  family.  In  the  States 
great  favours  arc  sometimes  given,  but  what  can  the  recipient  oi* 
sucli  favours  do,  wlien  lie  is  being  slandered  by  malicious  people. 
I〗o、v  should  I  be  jealous  of  her?" 

She  then  allowed  lier  to  go  to  her  husband's  couch,  and  she 
be^ot  a  son,  named  Shu  II".  Owing  to  his  beauty  and  hero-like 
strengtli  Shu  Hu  became  a  favourite  of  Lttan  Uttai  Tse:s  liowever, 


1  SAukinp  (Ilung-fun)  Pt.  V,  Bk.  IV，  34. 
， Cf.  p.  240  and  above  p. 鳳 

8  A  half-brother  of  Shu  lhiang.  His  mother  was  a  concubine  of  Shu 
Hsiang's  father. 

4  An  officer  of  Chin. 

b  Being  an  exceptional  woinan  by  her  beauty,  she  would  give  birth  to  an 
extraordinary  son  a  dragon,  and  it  would  be  dangerous  for  an  ordinary  man  like 
her  son  Shu  Httiung  to  be  a  blood  relation  of  sucli  an  extraordinary  person,  since 
fate  likes  to  strike  the  exalted. 

6  Quoted  from  the  T so-chuan,  Duke  Hxiang,  21st  year  (551  B.C.). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Oil  Poison. 


when  Fan  Hsikm  Tse  expelled  Luan  Huai  Tse^  he  killed  Shu  JIu, 
and  so  brought  misfortune  upon  Sh"  Hsiang. 

The  recesses  of  mountains  and  vast  marshes  are  the  places 
where  dragons  and  snakes  breed.  Shu  Hit's  mother  was  compared 
to  thera,  for  under  her  charms  tlie  poison  lay  liidden.  She  bore 
a  son,  Shu  //",  wliose  beauty  consisted  in  his  hero-like  strength. 
This  strength  grew  from  his  beauty,  and  the  disaster  came  from 
his  strength. 

Fire  has  splendour,  and  wood  has  a  pleasant  appearance.  Drag- 
ons and  snakes  correspond  to  the  east.  Wood  contains  the  essence 
of  fire,  hence  its  beautiful  colour  and  graceful  appearance.  The 
gall  being  joined  to  the  liver,  courage  and  strength  are  produced. 
The  force  of  tlie  fire  is  violent,  hence  the  givat  courage  ；  wood  is 
hard  and  strong,  hence  the  great  strength.  Wlien  there  is  any 
supernatural  apparition  produced,  it  is  tlirongh  beauty  that  it  brings 
about  misfortune,  and  through  courage  and  strength  that  it  injures 
like  poison.    All  is  owing  to  beauty. 

Generous  wine  is  a  poison:  one  oannot  drink  much  of  it.  The 
secretion  of  the  bees  becomes  honey;  one  cannot  eat  much  of  it. 
A  hero  conquers  an  entire  State,  but  it  is  better  to  keep  aloof  from 
him.  Pretty  women  delight  the  eyes,  but  it  is  dangerous  to  keep 
them.  Sophists  are  most  interesting,  but  they  can  by  no  means 
be  trusted.  Nice  tastes  spoil  the  stomach,  and  pretty  looks  beguile 
the  heart.  Heroes  cause  disasters,  and  controversialists  do  great 
harm.  These  four  classes  are  the  poison  of  society,  but  the  most 
virulent  poison  of  all  is  that  flowing  from  the  mouths  of  the  sophists. 

When  Con/itcim  caught  sight  of  Yang  Hit,-  he  retreated,  and 
liis  perspiration  trickled  down,  for  Yang  Hu  was  a  glib-tongued  man. 
The  poison  from  a  glib  tongue  makes  a  man  sick.  When  a  man 
has  been  poisoned,  he  dies  alone,  whereas  a  glib  tongue  ruins  a 
whole  State.  Thus  we  read  in  the  Shilc—:3—"  Endless  are  the 
slanderous  reports.  They  threw  four  States4  into  confusion."  Four 
States  were  thrown  into  confusion,  how  much  more  would  be  a 
single  individual.  Therefore  a  man  does  not  fear  a  tiger,  but  dreads 
tlie  calumniator's  mouth,  for  his  mouth  contains  the  worst  poison. 

1  Two  noblemen  of  Chin,  cf.  p.  206. 

， A  powerful,  but  unworthy  officer  in  Lu. 

»  Shiking  Pt.  II,  Bk.  VII,  5. 

*  Modern  commentators  explain  the  expression 四 國 as  meaning  44  the  four 
quarters  of  the  empire." 


Digitized  by  Google 


304 


Lun-H£ng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 
On  Anthroposcopy  {Ku-hsiang). 

It  is  a  common  belief  that  fate  is  difficult  to  foresee.  Far 
from  it,  it  can  easily  be  known,  and  by  what  means?  By  means 
of  the  body  and  its  bones.  As  man  derives  his  destiny  from  heaven, 
it  becomes  visible  in  his  body.  An  inquiry  into  these  manifestations 
leads  to  the  knowledge  of  fate,  just  as  from  a  look  at  measures 
one  learns  their  capacity.  By  manifestations  1  understand  the  osseous 
cunfig^irations. 

According  to  tradition  Huang  Ti  had  a  dragon  face,  Chuan  Hsfl 
was  marked  with  the  character  \Vux  on  liis  brow,  7T  Am  had  a 
double  tooth,  Yao's  eye- brows  had  eight  colours,  S/um's  eyes  double 
pupils,  Y'fi'a 4  ears  three  orifices,  T  ang  liad  double  elbows,  Win  Wang 
four  nipples,  \Yu  Wangs 3  spine  was  curbed  backwards,  Chou  Ktwg* 
was  inclined  to  stoop  forward,  Kno  Fao5  had  a  horse  s  mouth, 
Con/'ttcht.^  arms  were  turned  backwards.6  These  Twelve  Sages  either 
held  the  positions  of  emperors  and  kings,  or  they  aided  their 
sovereigns,  being  atixious  for  tlie  welfare  of  the  people.  All  the 
world  kr»o\vs  this,  and  the  scholars  speak  of  it. 

These  reports  being  given  in  the  Classics  and  Annals  can  be 
relied  upon.  The  light  literature,  such  as  journals,  letters,  and 
memoirs  wliich  th,、  Literati  do  not  read,  a  fiord  a  great  many  more 
iustaoces:  T'mng  Ihieh  had  four  eyes  and  became  one  of  Ihtatig 
Ti's  officials.  Ch  ung  Erh,  prince  of  CVim,7  had  a  double  rib,  aud 
became  the  foremost  of  all  the  feudal  lords.   Su  Ch'iu9  with  a  bone 

午  • 
t  Huang  Ti、  Chuan  Hs&，  Ti  Am,  Yaoy  Shun^  and  Yii  are  mythical  or  half 

legendary  rulers  of  old  China, 

8   Tang,  Wen  Wang,  and  VVr«  Waruf  are  the  founders  of  the  Shang  aud  Chou 

dynasties. 

4  Ta,，，  Duko  of  《、hou、  a  younger  brother  of  Wu  Wang,  whom  he  helped  to 
win  the  throne- 

1  A  minister  of  Shun. 

*  Like  the  wings  of  a  bird. 

7  <  ，h,ung  Erh  reigned  as  marquis  of  Chin  from  634-626  b.c, 

*  A  famous  statesman  who  in  333  B.r.  succeeded  in  forming  a  league  of  the 
Six  Staler  】  〃。"，  Wei,  (，l"、  and  Chu  against  Chin. 


igitized  by  Google 


On  Anthroposcopy. 


：^05 


on  his  no8e  obtained  the  premiership  in  all  the  Six  Kingdoms. 
Chang  Yi 1  having  a  double  ril)  was  also  made  a  minister  in  Ch  in 
and  Wei.  Hsiang  Fa,  who  owing  to  his  double  pupils  was  regarded 
as  a  dcBceudant  of  the  Emperor  Sft"n、  shared  the  empire  with 
Kao  Tsu.  Ch  in  P't/^,2  a  poor  fellow  wlio  had  not  enough  to  eat 
and  drink,  had  nevertheless  a  very  fine  appearance,  whicli  sur- 
prised every  one  so  much,  that,  they  exclaimed :  what  on  earth  does 
Ch  hi  P  ing  eat  to  become  such  a  portly  man.  Han  Ilsin 3  was 
rescued  from  the  axe  of  the  executioner,  when  he  cauglit  the  *'ye 
of  the  duke  of  T 4ny,  and  was  pardoned  also  ou  account  of  his 
extraordinary  appearance.  Fine  looks  and  stateliness  can  be  cha- 
racteristics as  well.4 

Kao  Tsu  had  a  high  nose,  a  dragon  face,  a  fine  beard  and 
72  black  spots  on  his  left  leg.5  Ln  from  Shan-fu fl  was  skilled  in 
prognosticating  from  looks.  When  he  saw  Kao  'I'su's  carriage,  he 
thought  him  very  remarkable,  and  therefore  gave  him  his  own 
daughter,  the  later  empress  L(l  Htm,  to  wife.  Afterwards  she  gave 
birth  to  Priuce  Hsiao  Hui7  aud  to  the  princess  Yuan  of  Lu.  Kao 
Tsu  was  first  a  headborougb  on  the  river  &<?.8  Then  he  gave 
up  his  post,  and  took  to  farming,  again  living  with  L&  Hou  and 
his  two  childreu  on  his  farm,  when  an  old  man  passed  ]>y,  and 
asked  for  a  drink.  In  return  lie  divined  Lil  IIou's  fate  by  her 
features  saying:  "  Madam,  you  belong  to  the  great  folks  of  the 
empire."  Called  upon  to  foretell  the  fortune  of  her  two  children, 
he  said  in  regard  of  Hsiao  Hui:  "  Tlie  cause  of  your  greatness, 
Madam,  will  be  this  son,"  and  with  respect  to  Yuan  of  Lu:  "You 
arc  all  noble."  When  the  old  man  had  left,  Kao  Tsu  came  home 
from  abroad.  Upon  being  informed  by  La  Hou  of  what  had  taken 
place,  he  ran  after  the  old  man,  and  stopped  him,  wishing  to  hear 
his  own  fortune  too.  The  old  fellow  n*joined:  "  licfore,  the  lady 
aud  her  children  bore  a  resemblance  to  you  in  their  looks,  but 

1  A  celebrated  politician  of  the  4th  century  b.c,  in  early  life  a  fellow-student 
of  Su  Chin, 

1  A  partisan  of  the  founder  of  the  Han  dynasty,  Kao  Tm,  one  of  the  Three 
Heroes,  who  in  early  youth  lived  in  great  poverty  and  subsequently  rose  to  the 
highest  honours. 

， Another  adherent  of  Han  Kao  Tsu,  also  one  of  the  Three  Heroes,  the 
third  being  Chang  Liang.    He  was  to  be  executed  for  treason,  but  was  pardoned. 

*  As  anomaloas  features. 

1  Thia  passage  occurs  iu  the  SAi-c/d  chap.  S,  p.  2，  which  treats  of  Han  Kao  Tsu. 

*  A  place  in  Shantung, 

7  He  succeeded  his  father  Kao  T*k  in  194  b.c. 

*  A  river  in  Shantung, 


gitized  by  Google 


B06 


Lon-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


your  mien  is  so  grand,  that  words  fail  me  to  describe  it."  1  After- 
wards the  empire  dcxolved  upon  Kao  Tsu,  as  tlie  old  man  bad 
foretold.  - 

If  we  draw  a  general  principle  from  this,  we  find  that  members 
of  the  same  family  all  show  their  nobility  in  their  appearance. 
Belonging  to  the  same  caste  and  animated  by  a  similar  spirit,  they 
must  necessarily  have  some  kindred  traits  in  their  mental  and 
physical  qualities.  It  however  happens  that  two  persons  of  different 
classes  and  incongruous  minds  inoot  together.  A  graudee,  when 
marrying,  gets  a  great  lady  for  his  wife,  and  a  gentlewoman  also 
finds  a  uoble  lord.  If  two  individuals  meet  despite  discrepancies 
of  appearance,  a  sudden  death  ensurs.  In  case  they  have  not  yet 
come  into  contact,  one  party  is  overtaken  by  death  previously. 

Wang  Manga  aunt  Lady  Cheng  was  bespoken  in  marriagf. 
When  the  moment  (！ amc  for  her  to  go,  the  bridegroom  suddenly 
died.  The  same  thing  liappcned  a  st'contl  time.  Then  she  was 
given  away  to  the  Prince  of  Chao,  but  the  Prince  had  not  yet 
takeu  ht»r,  when  he  breathed  his  last.  Nmi  Kung  Ta  Yu  of  C/i  iiiff-ho7 
met  with  Lady  Chiiig's  father,  the  【lonourablc  t'hih^  with  whom  he 
was  acquaintcil,  and  prognosticated  lier  fate  saying:  "  Slie  is  so 
exalted,  that  she  will  become  the  mother  of  the  empire."  At  that 
time  Hsilan  TP  was  emperor  and  Ywm  Ti  heir-apparent.  Through 
the  governor  of  the  principality  of  Wei,  Chih  then  gave  lier  iu  mar- 
riage to  the  heir-apparent,  who  was  very  pleased  witli  her,  and 
became  father  to  a  sou  of  the  name  of  Chiin  Shang.  At  the  death 
of  Hsilan  Ti  the  heir-apparent  ascended  tlie  throne,  Lady  Cheng  was 
made  empress,  and  Chiin  S/iang  heir-apparent.  When  Yuan  Ti*  died, 
the  heii>apj)arent  assumed  the  reins  of  government  ami  became  the  em- 
peror Cheng  Ti,  and  Lady  ChAng  became  empress-dowager  and  thus 
mother  of  the  empire.  Lady  Cheng  had  something  in  her  features 
indicative  of  her  future  imperial  motherhood.  The  two  men  to 
whom  she  was  betrothed  first,  and  the  Prince  of  Chao  had  no  marks 
showing  that  they  would  be  fathers  of  the  empire,  therefore  the 
two  died,  before  the  marriage  could  take  place,  aud  the  prince 
expired.  The  two  jiana's  and  the  Prince  of  Chao  were  not  pre- 
destinated Tor  imperial  sway,  and  Lady  Cheng  was  apparently  no 
match  for  tliem. 

1  Cf.  Shi-chi  he.  at.  which  slightly  difffrs. 
， A  city  in  Shantung ；  Tiayfair  No.  1G42. 
' 73-48  b.c. 

*  48-32  b.c. 

1  3*2-6  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Anthroposcopy. 


307 


The  prime  minister  Huang  Tse  Kung,1  who  was  originally  a 
border  warden  in  Yang-hsia,2  travelled  with  a  soothsayer  in  the  same 
carriage,  wlien  they  perceived  a  woman  seventeen  or  eighteen  years 
old.  The  fortune-teller  pointed  to  her  and  said: —"This  woman 
will  be  raised  to  high  honours,  and  become  consort  to  a  marquis." 
Huang  Tse  Kung  stopped  the  carriage,  and  looked  at  her  carefully. 
The  fortune-teller  said:— "If  this  woman  will  uot  become  noble, 
my  divination  books  are  of  no  use."  H 贿 ig  Tse  Kung  inquired  about 
her,  and  learned  that  she  was  from  the  next  village,  a  female 
belonging  to  the  Wu  family.  Tliereupon  he  married  her,  and  after- 
wards really  gained  high  honours,  was  given  the  post  of  a  prime 
minister,  and  created  a  marquis.3  Since  Huang  T  se  Kung  won  wealth 
and  honour,  his  wife  had  to  be  on  a  par  with  him.  Consequently, 
wlien  they  were  brought  together,  they  both  became  illustrious. 
Had  Huang  T  se  Kuiig's  fate  been  mean,  lie  would  not  have  got  that 
woman  as  a  consort,  and  had  thev  not  tallied  together  as  man  and 
wife,  they  would  have  had  tlie  same  misfortune  as  the  two  persons 
above  mentioned  and  the  Prince  of  Chao.  If  an  entire  family  has 
a  glorious  destiny,  tlien  later  on  every  thing  turns  to  their  honour 
and  advantage,  whereas  in  case  of  incongruity  of  osseous  structure 
and  physical  shape  they  will  be  separated  and  die,  and  cannot 
enjoy  great  happiness  long. 

In  noble  families  even  servants  and  slaves  as  well  as  cattle 
and  horses  which  they  rear  are  not  like  the  common  ones.  From  tlie 
looks  of  the  slaves  one  sees  that  they  do  not  easily  die.  The  cattle 
and  horses  often  produce  young.  The  seeds  in  the  fields  grow  up 
luxuriantly,  and  quickly  put  forth  ripe  grains.  In  commerce  those 
sort  of  people  manage  to  get  excellent  merchandise,  whicli  sells 
without  delay.  Those  who  know  fate,  find  out  the  great  folks 
amidst  low  people,  and  discern  the  miserable  among  the  magnates. 
Judging  from  the  osseous  structure  and  distinguishing  the  lines  on 
the  skin,  they  discover  mau's  fate,  whicli  always  confirms  their 
predictions. 

Viscount  ('hie"  of  Chao*  bade  Ku  Pu  Tse  CHing  tell  the  for- 
tunes of  his  sons.  He  found  none,  of  them  lucky,  until  lie  came 
to  the  son  of  tlie  slavc-girl  Choi,  Wn  fhll,  whom  he  declared  to  be 
a  peer.    Wn  I  Lit  had  an  excellent  character,  and  was  stamped  a 

1  Huang  T'se  Kung  was  prime  minister  of  the  emperor  Hnian  Ti,  died  51  b  c. 
*  In  Honan. 

8  A  parallel  parage  occurs  in  the  Han-shu,  quoted  in  the  T  ai-ping  yU-lan 
729  p.  4. 

4  516-457  b.c. 

Digitized  by  Google 


Lun-Hfng:  C.  Physical. 


nobleman  to  boot.  Later  on  Viscount.  Chien  put  the  heir-apparent 
aside,  and  raised  Wu  Hsll,  who  afterwards  became  Viscount  IUiang.1 

A  sootlisayer  said  of  Ch'ing  Pu2  tliat  he  would  be  tortured,  but 
then  become  prince,  and  he  really  was  made  a  prince  after  having 
suffered  punishment.3 

The  father  of  Wei  Ch'ing,*  Cltdng  Chi  had  illicit  intercourse  with 
a  maid  of  the  princess  Yang  Ihin,  Wei.  Wei  Ch  ing  was  born  in  the 
Chien-chang  Palace.  A  convict  read  his  destiny  in  his  features  and 
said  "  He  is  noble,  and  will  be  invested  with  the  rank  of  a  marquis."' 
Wei  Citing  replied  ： ― 44  For  a  slave  it  is  quite  enough  not  to  bo 
wliipped  or  reviled.  How  could  he  dream  of  a  marquisate?  "s  After- 
wards Wei  Ch  ing  entered  the  army  as  an  officer.  Haviug  dis- 
tinguished himself  in  several  battles,  be  rose  in  rank,  and  was  pro- 
moted, till  lie  was  made  generalissimo  with  the  title  of  marquis  of 
ten  thousand  families. 

Before  Chou  Ya  FuK  became  a  marquis,  IlsU  Fu  predicted  his 
fortune  saying: ― "Within  three  years  hence  Your  Honour  will  be 
a  general  and  minister,  and  have  the  control  of  the  empire.  You 
will  rank  so  high,  that  among  your  fellow  officials  there  will  not 
be  your  equal.  But  nine  years  later,  you  will  die  of  starvation."— 
Chou  Ya  Fu  replied  laughing,  "  My  elder  brother  already  inherits  the 
title  .of  marquis.  When  the  father  dies,  the  son  succeeds  to  his 
title.  Why  do  you  hint  at  my  becoming  marquis?  But  should  I 
really  attain  to  tliis  dignity,  as  you  say,  how  can  you  pretend  that 
I  shall  die  of  starvation?  Explain  this  to  me."  HsU  Fu  pointed  to 
the  perpendicular  lines  converging  at  the  corner  of  his  moutli,  and 
said,  44  This  means  death  by  starvation."  — Three  years  passed.  His 
brother,  marquis  Siting  of  Chiang 7  was  punished  for  an  offence.  Win 
7V 8  was  in  favour  of  the  marquis  of  Chiang's  son.  The  wise  coun- 
cillors proposed  Chou  Ya  Fu,  who  thereupon  was  created  marquis  of 

1  457  425  b.c.   Cf.  p.  226  and  Ski-chi  chap.  43,  p.  8  seq. 

2  A  military  adventurer  of  the  2nd  century  b.c.  His  surname  was  originally 
Ying  l)u.  It  was  changed  into  the  .sobriquet  Lh'intj  J'u  "  Branded  Pu  ",  af\er  he  had 
been  branded  in  his  early  life.  He  made  his  escape,  joined  in  the  rebellions  which 
led  to  the  rise  of  the  Han  dynasty,  and  was  rewarded  with  the  title  and  the  fief  of 
a  "  Priuce  of  Kiukiatuj."  Mayer«  Reader's  Manual  No.  926. 

*  Quotation  from  SAi-cAi  chap.  91,  p.  1. 

*  Cf.  p.  169. 

a  Quoted  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  Ill,  p.  1  v. 

6  Cf.  diles  Biogr.  Diet.  No.  426,  where  the  end  of  Chou  Ya  Fu  is  told  a  little 
differently. 

7  The  capital  of  the  Chin  State  in  Shansi,  the  modern  Chiang-clwu. 
»  Han  Wm  Ti  170-156  B.C. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Anthroposcopy. 


309 


T  iao 1  and  succeeded  the  marquis  of  Chiang.  During  tlie  six  later 
years  of  VVVw  Tts  reign  the  Ihiung-nu  invaded  the  Chinese  territory, 
and  Chott  Ya  Fu  became  general.  When  Ching  7T'  assumed  the  govern- 
ment, Chou  Ya  Fu  was  appointed  prime  miuister.  Later  on  he  retired 
on  account  of  sickness.  His  son  bought  from  the  imperial  arsenal 
five  hundred  mail-coats,  Avliich  he  wanted  for  his  father's  funeral. 
The  coolies  employed  at  the  job  wt*re  irritated  against  him  for  not 
having  received  their  money.  Knowing  that  tiscal  property  had 
be<*u  clandestinely  purchnsetl,  out  of  spite  they  denouueed  Chmt  Ya 
Fits  son  to  the  throne.  Ching  It  gave  order*  for  trying  aud  tor- 
turing Chmt  Ya  Fu,  who  did  not  eat  for  five  days,  spat  blood, 
and  died.3 

TSng  T  ung  took  the  fancy  of  HV/i  7i,  who  held  })im  in  higher 
esteem  than  a  minister,  presented  him  with  I'lionnous  sums  of  muney. 
aud  treated  him  almost  as  his  equal.4  A  fortune-teller  predicted 
his  destiny.  The  verdict  was  that  lie  would  become  poor  and 
miserable  and  die  of  starvation.  When  HV«  7»  died,  and  Ching  7$ 
had  mounted  tlie  throne,  Thxy  Tung  was  punished  for  unlawful 
coinage.  On  examination  Ching  7*  found  Teng  Tung  already  dead. 
He  stopped  at  the  deceased  man's  liouse,  but  did  not  discover  a 
single  cash.6 

The  prime  minister  Han6  when  a  youngster  borrowed  50  cash 
from  a  fortune-teller,  and  together  witli  liim  entered  tlio  Imperial 
Academy.  The  fortune-teller  divined  the  successes  of  the  scholars 
in  the  academy.  Pointing  at  /  Kuan1  lie  intimated  tliat  this  youth 
would  rise  so  high  as  to  become  a  chief  minister  of  state.  Ha"  sent 
the  fortune-teller  with  his  card  to  /  Kuan,  with  whom  he  contracted 
the  most  intimate  friendship.  lie  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  in 
order  to  sliow  his  reverence.  For  the  purpose  of  living  together 
with  I  Kttan  lie  moved  his  resident,  and  drew  as  near  as  possible. 
/  Kuan  was  sick,  Han  nursed  him  like  a  servant.  His  kindness 
towards  /  Kuan  was  greater  than  towards  those  of  his  own  blood. 
Later  on  his  name  became  famous  all  over  the  world.  /  Kuan  ob- 
tained the  post  of  a  secretary  of  state.  The  local  officials  had  to 
obey  his  orders.    He  recommt'iided  his  frieud  to  the  throne  for  an 


1  Another  ancient  city  in  Shan"  not  far  from  Chiang. 

a  Han  Ching  Ti  15(5  140. 

1  Quotation  in  a  abridged  form  from  ^ht->  hi  chap.  57,  p.  6  v.  seq. 

4  Tcng  T，"、g  was  a  initiion  of  the  Emperor  HVn  Ti, 

h  Cf.  Tcny  Tung's  biogrnphy  in  Shi-chi  chap.  125,  p.  2. 

6  Han  An  Kuo,  2nd  cent.  b.c. 

7  Died  112  b.c. 


gitized  by  Google 


310 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


appointment  at  the  court.  Han  subsequently  was  promoted  to  the 
post  of  a  prime  minister. 

The  convict,  JIsU  Fu  and  the  men  who  told  the  fortunes  of 
Ting  Tung  and  I  Kuan  can  be  considered  as  sooth  say  ere  who  knew 
fate.  These  sort  of  people  examine  the  symptoms  of  the  physical 
frame,  and  perceive  wealth  aud  honour,  poverty  and  disgrace,  just 
as  we  on  seeing  plates,  know  the  use  thereof.  Fine  vessels  are 
used  by  the  higher  classes,  coarse  ones  with  the  same  certainty 
find  their  way  to  the  poor.  Sacrificial  vases  and  tripods  are  not 
put  up  in  outer  buildings,  and  gourds  are  not  to  be  fouud  in  the 
principal  hall.  That  is  a  matter  of  course.  That  noble  bones  do 
not  meet  with  the  hardships  of  the  poor,  and  that  wretched 
features  never  share  the  joys  of  the  grand,  is  on  the  same 
principle. 

Vessels  used  as  measures  may  contain  a  peck  or  a  picul. 
Thus  between  the  human  ranks  there  is  a  difference  of  high  and 
low.  If  vessels  are  filled  over  their  size,  their  contents  runs  out. 
and  is  lost.  If  the  limit  of  a  rank  is  surpassed,  the  holder  perislies. 
By  making  in  our  discussion  of  fate  this  comparison  with  a  vessel, 
in  order  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  anthroposcopy,  we  arrive  at  the 
conclusion  that  fate  is  lodged  in  the  corporeal  form. 

But  not  only  are  wealth  and  honour,  poverty  and  wretched- 
ness visible  in  the  body,  pure  and  base  conduct  have  also  their 
phenomena.  Pre-eminence  and  misery  are  the  results  of  fate,  pure 
aud  base  conduct  depend  on  character.  As  there  is  a  method 
determining  fate  by  the  bones,  there  is  also  such  a  science  doing 
the  same  for  the  character.  But,  whereas  there  are  famous  sooth- 
sayers, it  is  not  known  that  a  science  determining  the  cliaracter 
by  the  features  exists. 

Fan  Li1  left  Yfleh.  From  Ch'i^  he  deftpatche<l  a  letter  to  the 
high  officer  Chung  reading  as  follows:—"  When  the  flying  birds  are 
all  exterminated,  the  good  bow  is  put  away.  When  the  cunning 
hare  is  dead,  one  cooks  tlie  greyhound.  The  king  of  Yiieh  lias  a 
long  neck  and  a  mouth  like  a  beak.  One  may  share  hardships, 
but  not  enjoy  happiness  with  liim.  Why  do  you  not  leave  him? " 
The  officer  Chung  could  not  leave,  but  lie  pretended  sickness,  and 
did  not  go  to  court,  whereupon  tlu»  king  sent  him  a  sword,  by 
which  he  died.3 

1  A  native  of  the  Yiieh  State,  and  minister  of  King  Kou  Chien  of  Yiieh,  in 
modern  (Jhekiangy  5th  cent,  b.c. 

3  An  old  State  in  Shantung. 

， Quoted  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  41,  p.  6  v.    The  last  clause  is  abridged. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Ajithroposcopy. 


311 


Wei  Liao,1  a  native  of  Ta-liang,9  proposed  to  Ch  in  Shih  Huang 
VV3  a  scheme  to  conquer  the  empire.  Ch'in  Shih  Huang  Ti  accepted 
his  proposal  and  conferred  upon  him  the  highest  distinctions,  giving 
him  the  same  dresses  and  the  same  food  as  lie  bad  himself.  Wei 
Liao  said,  "  The  king  of  Ch  in*  has  a  hi^li  nose,  long  eyes,  the 
clicst  of  a  vulture,  the  voice  of  a  jackal,  the  look  of  a  tiger,  and 
the  heart  of  a  wolf.  He  knows  no  kindness.  As  long  as  he  is 
hard  up,  he  is  condescending,  but,  wlien  he  has  got  what  lie  wanted, 
he  despises  men.  I  am  a  simple  citizen,  yet  lie  always  treats  me 
with  great  condescension.  Should  I  really  serve  the  king  of  Ch  in, 
lie  would  gain  his  ends,  and  the  whole  world  would  be  robbed. 
I  can  have  no  dealings  with  liim."    Thus  he  went  away.5 

Fan  Li  and  Wei  Liao  correctly  determined  future  events  by 
observing  the  outward  signs  of  character.  Things  really  happened, 
as  they  *liad  foretold  from  tlie  features.  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
that  character  and  destiny  are  attached  to  the  body. 

The  instances  quoted  in  the  popular  literature  are  universally 
regarded  as  true.  Besides  there  are  a  great  many  cases  in  olden 
and  modern  times  not  much  heard  of,  which  are  all  well  founded. 
The  spirit  comes  from  heaven,  the  body  grows  on  earth.  By 
studying  the  body  on  earth  one  becomes  cognizant  of  the  fate  in 
heaven,  and  gets  the  real  truth. 

Confucius  is  reported  to  have  examined  T  ail  T'ai  Tse  Yil,0  and 
Tang  Chit''  to  have  divined  for  Tsai  and  that  both  of  them 

were  mistaken.  Where  did  their  error  come  from?  The  signs  were 
hidden  and  too  delicate.  The  examination  may  liave  for  its  object 
the  interior  or  the  exterior,  the  body  or  the  voice.  Looking  at 
the  outside,  one  perhaps  misses  the  inside,  and  occupied  、vith  the 
body,  one  forgets  the  voice. 

When  Confucius  came  to  ChSng,9  he  lost  Lis  disciples.  He  stood 
by  himself  near  the  east  gate  of  ChSng.  Some  man  of  Clihig  asked 
Tse  Kung  10  saying: ― "  TIutc  is  a  man  near  the  east  gate  with  a 

1  Wei  Liao  wrote  a  work  on  the  art  of  war. 

a  An  ancient  name  of  K'ai-png-fu. 

3  The  first  emperor  of  the  Ch'in  dynasty  221-209  b.c. 

4  Shik  Huang  Ti's  kingdom  in  Shensi. 

s  Quoted  in  an  abridged  form  from  the  S/ii-thi  chap,  fi,  p.  6  seq. 

0  A  disciple  of  ( 'onfucius,  extremel  v  ugly,  but  very  talented.  Cf.  Analects  VI,  12. 

7  A  famous  physiognomist  3rd  cent.  b.c. 

*  A  native  of  】'rn，  who  first  .studied  physiognomy  with  Tang  Chu  and  later 
on  was  appointed  minister  by  King  (  U'ao  Hsiang  of  Chin  (MU5-249  b.c). 

0  In  Honan. 

10  A  disciple  of  Confudu». 


Digitized  by  Google 


312 


Lun-Wng:  C.  Physical. 


head  like  that  of  Yao,  a  neck  like  that  of  Kao  Yoo,  and  shoulders 
resembling  those  of  Tse  Ch'au. 1  But  from  his  waist  downward  he 
is  by  three  inches  shorter  than  Yd.  He  is  worn  out  like  a  stray 
dog."  Tse  Kung  informed  Confucius.  Confucius  laughed  heartily  and 
said,  "  My'  appearance,  never  mind,  but  like  a  stray  dog!  just  so, 
just  so."  * 

In  the  matter  of  Confucius'  appearance  the  man  of  Chlng  was 
wrong.  He  was  not  clever,  and  his  method  was  very  superficial. 
Confucius  made  a  mistake  witli  Tse  Yii,  and  T  ang  ChU  was  iu  the 
wrong  with  T  sai  Tsi、  as  the  man  of  i'hing  in  looking  at  Confucim 
<lid  not  apprehend  his  real  appearance.  Judging  from  Iiis  mien 
('onfitcim  was  deceived  with  Tse  Yu,  aud  going  by  words  be  was 
in  error  in  regard  of  Tsai  Yu.3 

1  The  appellation  of  Kung  Sun  Ch'iao,  a  famous  minister  of  the  Cheng  State 
in  the  6th  cent.  b.c. 

3  A  quotation  from  Shi-chi  chap.  47,  p.  12  v.  Cf.  Legge,  Analects,  ProUffom- 
ena  p.  78. 

*  One  of  the  disciples  of  Confucius,  whose  character  was  not  quite  on  a  level 
with  his  fluency  of  speech,  wherefore  the  Master  said  of  him,  "  In  choosing  a  man 
for  his  gift  of  speech,  I  have  failed  as  regards  Tsai  】'a." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Loug  Life  and  Vital  Fluid. 


313 


CHAPTER  XXV. 
Long  Life  and  Vital  Fluid  (Chi-shou). 

The  fate  which  every  one  rcoeivos  is  of  two  kinds,  one  deter- 
miues  those  events  which  he  must  encouiiter,  the  other  is  the  fate 
of  strength  and  weakness,  of  long  or  sliort  life.  The  events  to  be 
encountered  are  war,  fire,  crushing,  and  drowning,  etc.;  strength  aud 
long  life,  weakness  and  short  life  are  connected  with  the  copious- 
ness and  scarcity  of  the  received  fluid.  War  and  fire,  crushing  and 
drowning  can  supervene,  therefore  tliere  is  not  necessarily  a  period 
of  invariable  length  for  what  lias  been  received  as  fate. 1 

If  the  limit  of  strength  and  long  life  be  a  hundred  years, 
then  the  fluid  of  those  wlio  do  not  reach  a  hundred  years  must 
be  insufficient. 

When  the  fluid  is  copious,  tlie  body  becomes  strong,  and  the 
body  being  strong,  life  lasts  long.  On  the  other  liand,  when  the 
vital  force  is  scanty,  tlie  body  is  weak,  and  with  a  weak  body  life 
is  short.  A  short  life  is  accompanied  by  much  sickness.  If  the  span 
be  short,  people  die  soon  after  they  are  born,  and  are  annihilated, 
before  they  are  fully  developed.  That  is  because  their  vital  fluid 
is  too  little  and  too  weak. 

Those  imbued  with  a  copious  and  a  strong  fluid  do  not  all 
at  once  end  their  lives.  If  people  do  not  meet  with  any  accidents, 
and,  leading  a  quiet  life,  become  exhausted  and  worn  out,  until 
they  die  for  want  of  vitality,  it  is  owing  to  tlie  insufficiency  of 
their  vital  fluid,  which  they  have  completely  used  up.  Their  fate 
ia  similar  to  that  of  those  who  expire  soon  after  their  birth  and 
are  cut  off,  before  they  have  grown  up.  In  all  tliese  cases  the  de- 
ficiency of  the  fluid  is  the  reason,  why  those  persons  do  not  live 
a  hundred  years. 

The  fluid  which  fills  men  is  either  full  and  abundant ― then 
they  are  strong  and  vigorous,  or  scanty  and  poor— then  they  are 
weak  and  feeble.    Imbued  with  a  full  quantity,  tliey  are  strong, 

1  What  has  been  received  as  fate  is  the  vital  fluid  or  life.  Tho  length  of 
lift  depend*  on  the  quality  of  this  fluid,  but  it  can  be  shortened  by  accidents,  such 
m  war,  fire,  etc.  coining  from  abroad,  before  vitality  is  exhausted,  and  death  would 
ensue  under  normal  conditions.— The  Chinese  word  used  here, 命 means  "  fate " 
aa  weU  as  "  life." 


314 


Lun-Hrng:  C.  Phy»*'oal. 


and  live  long,  filled  with  a  small  dose,  they  are  weak,  and  lose 
their  bodies. 

When  Heaven  and  Earth  produce  things,  sometimes  these  things 
do  not  grow  to  their  full  growth,  and  when  father  and  mother  en- 
gender a  oliikl,  sometimes  its  full  development  is  checked.  It  happens 
that  a  plant  V»eai*s  a  fruit,  hut  that  tliis  fruit  withers,  dies,  and 
drops,  and  it  also  happens  that  people  have  a  son  who  is  killed 
in  his  youth.  Had  this  fruit  not  withered,  it  would  also  liave  com- 
pleted one  year,  and  liad  the  son  not  been  killed,  he  would  like- 
wise have  lived  a  hundred  years.  The  decay  of  the  fruit  and  the 
death  of  the  son  are  brought  about  by  tlie  weakness  of  their  vital 
force.  Although  tlieir  forms  be  complete,  their  feeble  fluid  does 
not  suffice  to  fill  them. 

When  the  cries  of  a  new-born  infant  are  shrill  and  piercing, 
it  will  live  long,  when  they  are  whining  and  pitiful,  it  will  die 
young.  Wliy?  Because,  wlien  tlie  new-horns  receive  their  fate  of 
longevity  or  short  life,  the  greater  or  smaller  quantity  of  their  fluid 
forms  their  nature.1 

When  a  motlier  nurses  her  clnld  at  longer  intervals,  it  will 
be  fit  for  life,  whereas,  when  she  nourishes  it  very  frequently,  it 
will  (lie.  Why?  Because  the  mirsiiig  at  intervals  shows  that  tlie 
fluid  is  copious,  and  the  child  is  strong.  The  frequent  suckling 
proves  the  insufficiency  of  the  vital  fluid  and  the  weakness  of 
the  baby. 

A  fondling  is  a  son  anterior  to  whom  another  son  lias  already 
been  brought  up  and  died.  They  say  that  sucli  a  fondling  cannot 
live,  and  call  it  a  fondling.  The  idea  ia  that,  another  son  having 
already  died,  the  mother  is  too  anxious  about  the  new  one,  and 
spoils  his  nature.  The  fonnor  son  is  dead,  and  tlie  fondling  is 
doomed,  because  he  is  nursed  nun-h  too  often.  His  fluid  being 
too  feeble,  he  <'annot  thrive.  'I'lioi'gli  he  may  grow  up,  he  is  too 
easily  affected  l>y  external  inlhuuiccs.  He  will  always  be  the  first, 
to  catch  a  dise.iso,  and  Ins  alone  will  prove  incurable. 

A  fate  of  a  lmndred  years  is  tlio  proper  one.  Those  who 
cannot  coiiiplctc  a  liuiulred  years,  tliough  they  have  no  proper  fate, 
still  liav<-  a  fato.  In  the  same  nianm'r  the  proper  height  of  the 
Ituman  brxly  is  ton  foot.'-'   Therefore  a  man  is  called  chnvg-fu^  and 

1  And  this  nature  becomes  manifest  by  l he  way  in  which  the  new-borns  cry. 
Strong  baliies  have  strong  voices,  weak  ones  give  only  a  whine. 

2  On  the  Chinese  toot  see  p.  320  Note  1. 

3  Wang  Chung  explains  the  term  rhang-fu  "  young  man  "  as  origin- 
ally meaning  a  man  of  ten  feet  ―  chang. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Long  Life  and  Vital  Fluid. 


315 


chang-jen  is  an  honorary  designation  for  an  old  gentleman  and  an 
old  lady.1  A  man  not  measuring  ten  feet  lias  not  the  proper  height, 
but  neverlhcless  he  possesses  :i  body.  A  body  cannot  be  declared 
to  be  no  body  because  of  its  falling  short  of  ten  feet.  And  so  fate 
cannot  be  said  to  be  no  fate  on  account  of  its  not  coming  up  to 
a  hundred  years. 

Heaven  does  not  distribute  long  and  short  fates,  of  which 
every  one  would  obtain  either  We  may  say  that  man  receives  his 
fate  in  his  fluid  from  Heaven,  which  is  tlie  same,  whether  he  fin- 
ishes it  sooner  or  later.  There  is  a  saying  to  the  ellVct  that,  if 
somebody  aspires  to  royalty  and  does  not  sucoeetl,  this  pretender 
can  remain  a  leading  prince.  Leading  princes  are  unsuccessful  pre- 
tenders to  royalty.  A  pretender  should  rise  to  royalty,  as  a  long  life 
ought  to  come  up  to  a  hundred  years.  Unable  to  become  a  king, 
he  retires  and  continues  a  leading  prince,  and  thus  he  who  cannot 
attain  to  a  hundred  years  resigns  himself  to  a  premature  death. 

A  king  and  a  pretender  do  the  same,  but  are  given  different 
names,  the  one  an  honourable,  the  other  a  contemptible  one.  A 
long  and  a  short  life  arc  caused,  as  it  were,  by  the  same  fluid,  but 
they  are  of  different  duration,  either  long  or  short.  Uow  do  we 
know  that  lie  who  does  not  live  a  hundred  years,  and  dies  an 
untimely  death,  possesses  a  fate  of  a  hundred  years  all  the  same? 
Because  his  bodily  frame  is  as  big  and  as  tall  as  that  of  others. 
A  body  that  has  lived  a  huntlrod  years  does  not  differ  from  another 
of  fifty  years.  The  bodies  not  being  different,  the  vital  fluids  cannot 
differ  either.  Birds  and  animals  have  other  bodies  than  man,  hence 
the  length  of  their  lives  must  differ  from  the.  human. 

How  can  we  prove  that  human  life,  if  it  be  long,  lasta  a 
hundred  years?  There  are  such  cases  in  the  world,  and  the  Literati 
say  that  during  the  time  of  universal  peace  people  used  to  be  very 
tall,  and  live  about  a  hundred  years,  which  was  tli'、  e fleet  of  the 
harmonious  fluid.  In  the  Canon  of  Yfu>,  Yuo  says,  "I  have  been 
seventy  years  on  the  throne." 2  Me  wished  to  abdicate,  and  found 
Shun.  Shun  was  tried  and  had  occupied  the  tlirone  thirty  years,3 
wlien  Yao  retired  owing  to  liis  old  age.  Eight  years  afterwards  he 
expired.    Ninety-eight  years  had  elapsed  until  his  (lecwise.4    But  he 

1  A  hashand  thus  addresses  his  father  and  mother-in-law. 

， Quotation  from  the  Shukimj  Pt,  I，  chap.  Ill,  12  {Legge  Vol.  Ill,  Pt  I,  p.  25). 
， The  Shi-chi  chap.  1,  p.  20  {Chavannes,  Mrm.  Hist.  Vol.  I，  p.  69)  writes 
twenty  years. 

4  In  that  case  Shun  cannot  have  reigned  for  hira  longer  than  20  years,  for 
70  +  20  +  8  =  98. 


Digitized  by  Google 


316  Lun-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 

must  already  have  lived,  before  he  ascended  the  throne.  Counting 
all  these  numbers  together  we  arrive  at  an  aggregate  sum  of  over 
a  hundred  years. 

It  is  further  stated  that  "Shu"  was  thirty  years  old,  that  he 
was  tried  thirty  vears,  and  tliat  ln»  was  on  the  throue  fifty  years, 
when  he  went  on  high  and  died,"  1  which  makes  just  one  hundred 
years.5 

Whi  Wang  said  to  Wu  Wang,  "  I  am  a  hundred  years,  and 
you  are  ninety.  1  will  give  you  tliree  years  of  mine."  W^ng  Wang 
was  ninety-seven  years  old,  when  he  died,  and  Wu  Wang  ninety- 
three,  when  lie  departed.3 

The  Duke  of  Chou  was  a  younger  brother  of  Wu  Wang.  Between 
brothers  there  is  generally  no  greater  diflerence  than  ten  years. 
After  the  death  of  Wu  Wang^  Chou  Kung  became  regent.  Seven  years 
later  he  returned  the  government,  and  retired  owing  to  old  age. 
That  would  make  about  a  hundred  years.  The  Duke  of  S/iao  was 
an  elder  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Chou.  At  the  time  of  King  K  aug* 
he  was  still  Senior  Tutor,  whirh  would  make  more  than  a  hundred 
years. 

Sages  are  endued  with  tlie  harmonious  fluid,  therefore  the 
years  of  their  destiny  have  tlie  proper  number.  The  harmonious 
fluid  is  conducive  to  a  tranquil  government.  Therefore  during  the 
age  of  universal  pt'ace  tlie  number  of  tall  and  long-lived  persons 
was  particularly  great.  One  hundred  years  is  the  proper  number 
of  years  of  a  long  human  life,  as  autumn  is  the  proper  time  for 
tlie  fate  of  plants,  since  plants  live  until  autumn,  when  they  die. 

Plants  perishing  before  or  after  autumn  are  similar  to  meu 
whose  life  either  exceeds  or  falls  short  of  a  hundred  years.  The 
time  before  or  after  autumn  corresponds  to  more  or  less  than  a 
hundred  years.  Some  plants  fade  already  after  they  have  pierct-d 
the  earth,  as  men  may  die  soon  after  their  birth.  Otlu'r  plants  may 
pass  tlie  autumn  without  withering  just  like  men  whose  years  may 
eventually  be  from  one  hundred  to  three  huudred. 

1  Quotation  from  the  Shuking  (Shun-tien)  Pt.  II,  Bk.  I,  chap.  VI,  28  {Uggt 
Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  p.  51). 

s  The  computation  giv«a  1 10  not  100  years.  We  should  read  "he  was  tried 
twenty  years  ，，  instead  of  thirty,  the  reading  adopted  in  the  Shi-chi  and  defended  by 
several  old  coinmontators.  Cf.  I^egge's  notes  to  the  passage  and  ( 'Itavannes  he.  cit. 
p.  01  Note  2. 

3  Quoted  from  the  Liki,  \\m  Wang  nhih-tst  {Lrgye,  Sacred  Books  Vol.  XXVII, 
p.  344).  The  roiuriientators  are  at  a  loss,  how  to  explain  that  Wrn  Wang  was  only  ten 
years  older  than  his  son,  Wu  Wany,  and  how  he  could  give  him  some  of  his  years. 

*  1078-1053  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


♦ 

Long  Life  and  Vital  Fluid. 


•Ml 


It  is  on  record  that  Lao  Tse  lived  over  two  hundred  years. 1 
The  Duke  of  S/iao  became  one  hundred  ami  eighty  years  old.  Kao 
Tmng 2  reigned  one  hundred  years,  and  King  Mu  of  the  Chon  dyn- 
asty likewise  one  hundred.3  Including  the  time  before  his  ascension, 
there  must  have  been  upwards  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-four  years 
altogether. 

1  Sse  Ma  Ch'ien  mentions  thb  report  in  his  biography  of  Lao  Tte  (Shi-chi, 
chap.  (53,  p.  3).  Some  said  that  Lao  Tse  became  over  160  years  old,  others  that  he 
lived  over  200  years,  prolonging  his  life  by  tlto  practice  of  virtue. 

， The  Shaking  Pt.  V,  BL  XV,  5  、Le9yt  Vol.  III，  Pt.  II,  p.  407)  expressly 
states  that  Kao  T»ung  =  Wu  Ting  enjoyed  the  throne  for  fifty  and  nine  years,  not 
for  a  hundred.  He  reigned  from  1324  -1266  ii.r.  1 

«  Thus  the  diking  (Lu-hsing)  Pt.  V，  Bk.  XXVII,  1  {Ltggt  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II, 
p.  588)  aa  Wany  Ch'ung  and  others  understand  the  passage  (On  L<gge's  diflferent  view 
cf.  his  uotes).  According  to  the  Shi-chi  King  Jlu's  reign  lasted  but  55  years.  It  lit 
usually  reckoned  from  1001-947  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


318  LuH-H*ng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 
Miracles  (Chi-kuai). 

The  Literati  pretend  that  8ages  are  not  horn  from  human 
sperm,  but  that  they  are  eiulowed  with  a  special  essence  from 
Heaven.  The  mother  of  Yil  swallowed  pearl-barley,1  and  gave  birth 
to  y'V  whence  tlie  lls'ta  dynasty  bus  its  surname  Sue.3  Hsieh's  mother 
cousumed  a  swallow's  egg,  and  was  delivered  of  Ihieh*  wlience 
the  Yin  dynasty  derived  its  surname  Tse.h  The  mother  of  IIou  Chi 
walked  in  the  foot-steps  of  a  giant,0  and  bore  Hou  (,hi,，  wlieuce 
the  Chou  received  their  surname  67<t'.8  The  Shiking  says,  "  There 
was  no  remling  and  no  tearing,  thus  IIou  Chi  was  born."9 

They  further  state  that  Yil  and  Hsie/i  were  born  unnaturally, 
issuing  from  their  mother's  bai-k,  and  that  Hou  Chi  was  born  na- 
turally. There  was  no  rending  and  no  tearing,  the  mother's  body 
did  not  sufler,  hence  the  expression: ― no  rendiug  and  i\6  tearing. 
The  descendants  of  thost'  born  unnaturally  die  an  unnatural  death, 
while  the  descendants  of  those  born  naturally  die  naturally.  There- 
fore C'/iieh  and  Chou10  were  executed,  and  Nan  Wang 1 1  was  deprived 
of  his  cities.    These  words  at't'm  to  be  self-cousistent,  therefore 


' 薰苡 


1  lib  legend  is  mentioned  in  the  WW  】'fiM  Ch'un 《，； iu、  the  Chix>nicle  of  Wu 
and  Tuehf  by  Chao  Vrh  of  the  1st  cent.  a.d. 

8 姒. 

*  Cf.  Chap.  XX XVII.  The  S/,ainff  Pt.  IV,  Bk.  Ill,  Ode  3  only  says  that 
Heaven  coiumissioncd  the  swallow  to  descend  and  give  birth  to  H^eh  、Legg，  Vol.  IV, 
Pt.  II,  p.  63G). 

6  -Hp" ,  which  also  may  signify  an  egg. 

'跡- 

1  Chiang 】 uan,  the  mother  of  Hou  Chi  "  trod  on  the  toe-print  made  by  God  " 
says  the  Shihinp,  Pt.  Ill,  Bk.  II,  Ode  1  {Legge  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  II,  p.  415). 

8 娘, Yii,  Ihieh,  and  Hou  Chi  arc  the  ancestors  of  the  Three  Dynasties:  — 
H«ia,  J  in,  and  Chou.  The  Sk"o-、r',n  observes  that  because  the  mothers  of  these 
Sages  were  moved  by  Heaven,  Son  of  Heaven  became  a  term  for  a  Holy  Emperor. 

" Sliikiny  Pt.  Ill,  Hk.  II,  Ode  I,  2. 

The  last  emperors  of  the  Usia  and  the 】Vn  dynasties. 

" The  \anl  reigning  emperor  of  the  house  of  Chou  (314-256  B.C.),  who  in 
256  had  to  surrender  36  cities  to  the  King  of  Ch  in  and  in  the  same  year  died  as 
a  prisoner  of  Ch  in. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Miracles. 


319 


people  believe  them,  and  since,  in  addition,  evidence  is  given  to 
establish  their  truth,  tliey  rely  on  these  utterances. 

The  Chan-shu 1  also  relates  of  tlie  mother  of  Yao,  Clung  Tu， 
that  she  conceived  from  a  red  dragon,  when  she  weut  out  into 
the  country,  and  gave  birth  to  Yao.  From  the  chronicle  of  Kao 
Tsu9  we  learn  that  dame  Liu  was  reposing  on  the  banks  of  a  large 
lake.  In  her  dream  she  met  with  a  spirit.  At  that  time  there  waa 
a  tempest  with  thunder  and  lightning  and  a  great  darkness.  T  ai 
Kung9  went  near,  and  perceived  a  dragon  above  her.  She  became 
enceinte  and  was  delivered  of  Kao  Tm.  These  instances  of  the  super- 
natural action  of  spirits  are  not  only  narrated,  but  also  written 
down,  and  all  tlie  savants  of  the  day  swear  by  them.  A  thorough 
investigation,  however,  will  show  tlieir  futility. 

The  statement  of  the  S/nking  that  there  was  no  rending  and 
no  tearing  viz.  that  the  mother's  body  was  not  much  affected  may 
be  true,  but  the  assertion  that  Yil  and  Hsieh  issued  from  tlieir 
mother's  back  is  irrational.  When  cicadas  arc  born,  they  break 
forth  from  the  back  of  the  larva;.  Did  Heaven  in  generating  those 
sages  follow  the  law  of  the  larvse? 

Hares  conceive  by  licking  the  pubescence  of  plants.  When 
the  leveret  is  born,  it  issues  from  the  mouth  of  the  hare.  Since 
the  mother  of  Yil  swallowing  the  barley  and  tliat  of  Hsieh,  who 
consumed  the  awallo、v，s  egg,  were  like  hares  licking  the  pubescence, 
their  sons  ought  likewise  to  have  issued  from  their  mouths,  and 
not  from  their  backs.  Consequently  the  statement  about  the  back 
is  preposterous. 

In  the  world  many  persona  die  a  sanguinary  death  by  the 
sword,  and  it  is  not  necessary  that  their  first  ancestor  should  have 
had  an  unnatural  birth.  When  the  Ch  in  lost  the  empire,  Yen  Yileh* 
beheaded  //"  Hai,'°  and  Hsiang  W  executed  7^-  Yiug.1  Was  the, 
forefather  of  the  Ch  in,  Po  Yi0  born  unnaturally  ?  Ergo  tlie  thesis 
of  natural  and  unnatural  births  based  on  the  ancestors  of  the  Three 
Dynasties  is  erroneous. 


1  A  book  of  prophecies  wrongly  ascribed  to  Confucius. 

*  S/ti-chi  chap.  8,  p.  2. 

3  The  father  of  Kao  Tmu 

*  The  son-in-law  of  the  powerful  eunuch  (  hao  Kao,  who  contrived  the  death 
of  the  emperor.    Cf.  (—'havanne',  M>:m,  //"/.  Vol.  II,  p.  213  acq. 

6  The  Emperor  Hrh  Shih  Huang  Ti、  son  of  ('h'in  SMh  Huang  7»,  209-206  b.c. 

6  Cf.  p.  178. 

7  A  child  which  occupied  the  throne  fin  days  only. 
' The  forester  of  the  Emperor  Shun. 


Digitized  by  Google 


320 


Lun-H*ng:  C.  Physical. 


Moreover,  pearl-barley  is  a  plant,  a  swallow's  egg  a  bird,  and 
a  giant's  foot-prints  are  earth.  These  three  things  are  bodies,  but 
not  a  fluid,  how  could  they  procreate  a  man?  With  regard  to 
Sages  people  suppose  that  they  receive  the  essence  of  Heaven,  which 
is  an  exceptionally  fine  fluid,  wherefore  their  doings  are  so  different 
from  those  of  the  masses.  Now  the  progenitors  of  the  Three  Dy- 
nasties are  born  from  a  plant,  a  bird,  and  earth.  Could  these  be 
regarded  as  very  fine  essences  ？ 

Since  among  the  productions  of  Heaven  and  Earth  man  is 
the  noblest,  tlie  others  are  common.  Now,  if  the  essence  of  those 
common  things  should  be  the  sperm  for  the  noblest  creature,  man, 
how  could  it  be  very  fine? 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  pigeon  or  a  sparrow  emitted  their  fluid 
into  a  wild  goose  or  a  wild  swan,  it  would  never  produce  an  egg. 
Why?  Because  a  pigeon  and  a  sparrow  are  too  small,  compared 
with  a  wild  goose  and  a  wild  swan.  Now,  the  body  of  a  swallow 
measures  but  five  inches,  and  the  stalk  of  pearl-barley  not  more 
than  several  feet.  How  could  the  two  women  who  swallowed 
the  egg  and  the  grain  have  begot  a  creature  of  seven  feet?  1 

Supposing  that  one  melts  the  copper  required  for  a  tripod 
and  pours  it  into  the  mould  of  a  cash,  it  is  plain  that  one  could 
not  produce  a  tripod.  Now  the  giant  is  the  Spirit  of  Heaven,  there- 
fore his  foot-prints  were  so  big.2  The  man  with  the  huge  foot-prints 
is  like  the  molten  copper  for  a  tripod,  and  Chiang  Ynan'sz  body  like  the 
mould  of  a  cash.  Should  the  giant  emit  his  fluid  into  Chiang  Yuan, 
her  body  would  be  much  too  small  to  receive  the  wliole  essence,  and 
without  tilis  wliole  essence  IIou  Chi  rould  not  have  been  born. 

If  Y(u>  and  Kao  Tsu  were  really  the  sons  of  dragons,  their 
nature  as  sons  ought  to  have  been  similar  to  that  of  their  dragou 
fathers.  Dragons  am  ride  on  the  clouds,  and  Yao  and  Kao  Tsu 
should  have  done  the  same. 

All  plants  growing  from  earth  resemble  their  own  species,  but 
not  earth,  for  they  are  not  produced  by  earth,  which  merely  nour- 
ishes and  feeds  them.  A  mother  with  child  is  like  the  earth  feeding 
j)lauts.  The  mothers  of  Yao  und  Kao  Tsu  roceived  the  emissions  of 
the  dragons,  as  earth  receives  the  seeds  of  plants.  Since  growing 
plants  are  similar  to  their  own  species,  the  two  emperors  also 
should  have  been  like  dragons. 

1  Man  measures  seven  feet  according  to  the  measurement  of  the  Chou  epoch, 
when  1  foot  was  like  20  cm.,  and  7  feet  ―  1,40  m. 

2  The  Shikiruj  loc.  cit.  explicitly  states  that  the  fuot-priiito  were  made  by  God. 

3  The  name  of  Hon  (fun  mother. 


gitized  by  Google 


Miracles. 


321 


Of  animals  witli  blood  males  and  females  pair.  When  they 
come  together  and  see  one  of  their  own  kind,  their  lust  is  excited, 
they  wish  to  satisfy  it,  and  then  are  able  to  emit  their  fluid. 
Should  a  stallion  see  a  cow,  or  a  male  sparrow  a  hen,  they  would 
not  couple,  because  they  belong  to  different  species.  Now,  dragons 
and  man  are  of  a  difl'erent  species  likewise.  How  then  could  a 
dragon  be  moved  l>y  a 】mman  being  so  as  to  impart  its  fluid? 

Some  say1  that,  wlion  the  Hsia  dynasty  was  near  its  down- 
fall, two  dragons  fought  together  in  the  court,  and  spat  their  saliva 
on  the  ground.  Wlien  the  dragons  had  disappeared,  their  saliva 
was  preserved  in  a  casket,  until  King  Yu  of  the  Clum 2  dynasty 
opened  it.  Then  the  saliva  of  the  snakes  changed  into  a  black 
lizard,  wbicli  slipped  into  tlie  seraglio,  where  it  had  intercourse 
with  a  palace  girl.    The  result  was  the  birth  of  Poo  Sse.3 

A  black  lizard  belongs  t"  another  class  than  man,  how  could 
it  become  enamoured  with  a  palace  girl,  and  emit  its  fluid?  The 
intercourse  with  the  black  lizard  was  vicious,  therefore  Poo  Sse 
caused  disasters,  and  overthrew  the  Cltou  dynasty.  When  tlifFerent 
species  recklessly  mix  together,  tlieir  olTspring  becomes  unprincipled 
and  mischievous.  Now,  the  mothers  of  Yito  and  Kao  7:vw  had  illicit 
intercourse,4  why  did  the  two  emperors  become  wise  and  sage  men, 
and  were  quite  diflerent  i'roin  Poo  Sse? 

They  say  that  Viscount  C/iien  of  Cliao  was  sick  and  for  five 
days  did  not  know  anybody.  When  he  awoke,  】it*  said,  "  I  have 
been  to  God's  abode.  There  appeared  a  brown  bear.  God  bade 
me  shoot  it;  I  hit  the  animal,  aud  it  died.  Then  came  a  spotted 
bear;  I  hit  it  also,  and  it  died.  After  the  two  bears  had  died,  I 
asked  a  gho«t  on  the  road.  The  ghost  said :— "  Tlie  brown  and 
tho  spotted  bears  arc  the  forofathcrs  of  two  ministers  of  67<in." 5 

Hears  are  animuls,  and  as  such  of  a  diirerent  class  from  inati. 
How  should  tliey  be<:ome  of  the  same  class  and  the  ancestors  of 
the  two  ministers?  The  time,  when  the  ancestors  of  tlie  two  min- 
isters, t\w  brown  and  the  spotted  bears,  killed  by  Viscount  Chiev, 
were  doomed  to  die,  was  one  of  luck  for  the  Viscount  Chien.  lie 
saw  them  as  in  a  dream.  They  were  empty  semblances  and  must 

I  For  details  cf.  Shi-vhi  chap.  4,  p.  25  (Chavantw,  AfAn.  HM.Vol.1,  p.  281) 
which  quotes  a  passage  from  the  Kuo-yu,  und  Lun-htng  Bk.  V,  p.  lv.  (/-A^ti). 
»  781-771  b.c. 

s  The  famous  favourite  of  King  J'tt,  who  ruined  the  empire  by  her  extra- 
vagance. 

4  With  two  dragons. 

'.、 Sec  p.  22：>,  wlicre  tl"s  story  is  told  in  detail, 
t.un-  Mrng.  'i\ 


H22 


Lnn-fUng:  C.  Physical. 


not  have  been  real.  Should  they  really  have  existed,  then  perhaps 
the  two  bears  were  first  metamorphosed  into  human  beings,  before 
they  engendered  the  two  ministers. 

Niu  Ai,  Duke  of  Lu、  was  changed  into  a  tiger  during  a  sick- 
ness.1 Man  can  be  transformed  into  an  animal,  as  animals  can  be- 
come men.  Probably  the  black  lizard,  which  entered  the  harem, 
was  also  first  changed  into  a  man. 

Between  heaven  and  earth  it  does  not  happen  that  creatures 
of  a  different  species  mix  and  couple.  Should  Heaven  have  the 
same  law  as  man,  their  likes  and  dislikes  would  also  be  similar. 
Man  does  not  like  different  species,  therefore  Heaven  would  not 
consort  witl)  such  either.  Although  man  is  created  by  Heaven, 
he  is  like  the  lice  which  are  produced  on  mat).  Man  docs  not  love 
tliose  lice,  for  what  reason  then  should  Heaven  desire  to  beget 
through  man?  Difl'erent  classes  have  diflerent  natures,  and  their 
scntimi'nts  and  desires  do  not  agree.  Heaven  and  Eartli  are  lius- 
bantl  and  wife.  Heaven  emits  its  fluid  into  Earth  and  produces 
the  various  tilings.  Man  is  born  by  propagation.  If  Sages  are 
formed  of  a  very  fine  essence,  yet  they  receive  the  fluid  from  their 
fathers,  and  are  not  endowed  with  a  special  essence  from  Heaven. 

Sliould  tlie  recipients  of  a  special  essence  become  Sages,  Hsieh 
and  Hon  ( hi  are  not  Sages,  and,  if  it  be  necessary  that  all  Sages 
should  li.ive  rt'ceived  a  special  fluid,  the  Twelve  Sages2  did  not  all 
meet  this  rcijuirement.  Wliat  lluid  did  tlie  mothers  of  lluauy  Ti, 
Ti  K' u,  Cliuan  Jfsil  and  S/mn  receive,  u\u\  、vhat  did  the  mothers  of 
Wen  Wnng,  Wu  Wang,  Chou  Kuuy,  and  C""f，":li"  swallow  to  become 
pregnant 

Perhaps  the  surnames  of  the  Three  Dynasties: ― Sm\  Tse，  and 
Chi  gave  tin-  impetus  to  the  invention  of  those  unfoumlccl  and 
marvellous  stories,  as  the  legeud  of  Huang  Ti  s  ascension  to  heaven 
originated  from  the  local  name  of  Tnig-hu?  Not  only  are  they 
irrational,  \mt  those  names  are  also  misinterpreted.  When  Tmng 
Hs'wh 4  invented  writing,  lie  made  the  signs  agree  \\'\X\\  the  ideas. 
Chiany  Yuan  walked  into  the  foot-prints  of  u  »iant.  "  Foot-priot " 
"  二跡 ) means  a  '*  basis  "  (r/ti  ---  }^),  therefore  the  surname 
should  be  "  liis  "  {clii  =  it)  with  i4  earth  "       =  土)  l>elow,  but 

it  is  "  woman  "  ("ft  = 女) with  "  chin  "  (<   :       at  its  side.  This 


1  Cf.  p.  320. 
， Cf.  p.  304. 

»  For  this  legend  vid.  p.  332. 

4  A  minister  of  Hiumg  Ti,  cf.  p.  "244. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Miracles. 


323 


is  not  the  character  chi  = 基 or  chi  = 跡 nor  in  accordance  with 
the  circumstances,1  whence  their  truth  becomes  very  d«>ul)tful. 

Judging  by  the  surname  Chi  of  the  Chou  of  those  of  tlie  lhia 
and  Yin,  、ve  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  Tse  and  Sse  have  nothing 
to  do  with  a  swallow's  egg  or  pearl-barley.  May  be  that  tlie 
mothers  of  Yt\  llsieh,  and  llou  Chi  were  just  going  to  conceive, 
when  they  happened  to  swallow  a  grain  of  pearl-barley  and  a 
swallow's  egg,  or  walked  upon  the  foot-prints  of  a  giant.  The 
world  is  fond  of  tlie  marvellous,  a  propensity  which  lias  been  the 
same  in  ancient  and  modern  times.  Unless  they  see  woudera,  people 
tlo  not  believe  that  a  person  possesses  extraordinary  faculties.  Thus 
tlu'y  explain  surnames  according  to  theii'  preconceived  ideas.  The 
Avorlcl  puts  implicit  faith  in  these  explanations,  and  they  arc  there- 
fore regarded  as  true.  Sages  have  repeatedly  uttered  their  doubts, 
but  tlii'y  could  not  solve  tliem,  ami  the  shallow  discussions  of  the 
scholars  of  the  day  cannot  discriminate  between  right,  aiul  wrong. 

The  literati,  who  approve  of  all  tliat  is  old,  have  put  forward 
those  arguinonts.  The  Spiking  says  that  there  was  no  rending  and 
no  tearing,  which  means  to  say  that  by  Hon  Chi 's  birtli  the  body 
of  his  mother  was  not  much  airectcd.  From  this  the  literati,  per- 
verting the  right  principles,  have  derived  the  story  of  the  unnatural 
birth  of  Yil  and  liiieh.  The  fecuudatitm  by  the  dragon  and  tlie 
dream  of  the  meeting  with  the  spirit  are  of  the  same  nature.  Tlie 
mothers  of  Yno  and  Kno  'I'm  were  just  about  to  become  enceinte, 
when  they  met  with  a  tliuiuler-storm  and  a  dragon  carrying  clouds 
and  rain  along.  People  seeing  these  plionomena  then  told  the  stories. 

A  dream  that  one  meets  with  a  d ra^on  is  un  augury  of  tlie 
birtli  of  a  wise  son.  Is  a  ilreain  of  a  meeting  with  gliosts  not  like 
a  dream  of  a  rendez-cous  with  a  spirit':'  How  could  it  be  roal? 
When  tlie  mother  liad  intercourse  with  the  dragon  in  thu  wilds, 
ami  when  the  dragon  ap|>oarod  on  high,  Yno  and  Kao  7:、"  p»*rcliance 
received  their  destiny  of  wealth  and  honour,  for  ;i  dragon  is  an 
auspicious  animal,  an<l  to  meet  it  appoariug  above  is  a  lucky  oim'n 
and  u  sign  that  fate  lia.s  been  rtM-eivrd. 

Wlien  the  Km[>eror  Kwmg  \Vn  Ti  saw  the  light  in  the  t'lti- 
yany  palace,  a  plia'nix  alighted  on  the  ground,  and  an  auspicious 
grain  grew  in  one  room.2  Wlien  Sages  are  born,  ami  strange  birds 
and  auspicious  things  appear  as  portents,  strange  and  auspicious 


1  The  surname  Chi  二 姬 does  not  point  to  the  foot-prints  which  Chiang 
) nan  is  believed  to  have  walked  upon.  * 

\  cr.  p.  iso. 

Digitized  by  Google 


324 


Lnn-HAng:  C.  Physical. 


things  become  visible  indeed.  If,  however,  we  are  to  regard  the 
children  born  then  as  the.  offspring  of  those  things,  should  we 
consider  the  Emperor  Knany  Wu  Ti  as  the  essence  of  the  auspicious 
blade  or  tlie  fluid  of  the  plurnix? 

According  to  the  chapters  on  the  pedigree  of  the  Emperors  1 
aud  the  Genealogical  Tables  of  the  Three  Dynasties2  Yil  was  the 
son  of  Am//,  and  Ihieh  and  Hon  Chi  were  both  sons  of  the  Emperor 
A  m,  their  mothers  being  second  wives  of  A  m.  Yao  also  was  a  son 
of  the  EniptTor  A'  m.  Why  tlien  must  the  wives  of  kings  and 
emperors  walk  into  the  country  '.*  Although  the  ancient  times  are 
noted  for  tlieir  simplicity,  yet  there  were  already  certain  rules  of 
propriety  established.  And  why  did  these  Indies  bathe  iu  the 
rivers?3  It  follows  that  the  assertion  about  the  Sages  receiving  a 
special  fluid  from  Heaven  and  their  mothers  becoming  pregnant  by 
swallowing  something;  is  a  fallacy. 

Aa  a  matter  of  fact  Sages  have  tlieir  prototypes  among  their 
ancestors :  being  as  virtuous  ns  Wen  Wang  and  Ha  Wang^  they  still 
find  tlieir  peers.  ( 'onfneius,  [)laying  the  (lute,  know  that  he  was  a 
dcsceii(lant  of  the  Yin*  and  Ilsiwig  Y"，  having  double  pupils,  was 
cognisant  of  his  being  a  scion  of  »S7<«//.6  The  Five  Emperors  and 
Three  Rulers  had  all  Huang  Ti  as  tlieir  ancestor.  He  was  a  Sage, 
wlio  first  received  a  grand  destiny.  Therefore  all  his  descendants 
became  emperors  and  rulers.  At  tlu*ir  births  there  were  miracles 
of  course,  wliicli,  if  they  did  not  appear  iu  tilings,  lieeame  mani- 
fest in  dreams. 

>  Chap.  2-4  of  the  SM-chL 
1  Cliaj).  13  of  the  Shi-chi. 

， As  the  mother  of  Ihieh  did,  when  sho  swallowed  the  egg,  cf.  chop.  XXXVII. 

4  We  learn  from  Lun-htng  Bk.  XXIV,  p.  3  that  it  was  against  the  custom 
to  make  niusir  oti  the  anniversaries  of  tlie  downtall  of  the  Hvt  and  】.'•'，  dynasties, 
as  oiio  did  not  write  on  tlie  death  day  of  T  sang  Hsieh,  tlie  inventor  of  writing. 
I  infer  from  tliis  tliat  tlie  lost  emperors  of  llie  ！ hia  and  Yin  dynasties  were  famous 
for  their  music,  and  that  Con/ucht*  feeling  in  liimself  a  talent  lor  music  imagined 
that  lie  was  a  desi-cndant  of  the  i  in  empcrora. 

5  Shun  had  double  pupils  as  well,  vid.  p.  304. 


igitized  by  Google 


Unfounded  Assertions. 


325 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 
Unfounded  Assertions  (Wu  hsing). 

Men  receive  the  vital  fluid  from  heaven  at  their  birth,  aud 
are  all  given  a  fate  lixing  the  length  of  tlieir  lives,  in  accordance 
to  wliicli  tlieir  bodies  exist  for  a  longer  or  shorter  period.  Just 
so  vases  are  formc<l  out  of  clay  by  the  potter,  and  plates  from 
copper  by  the  founder.  A 8  the  shape  of  a  vessel,  onoe  completed, 
cannot  be  made  smaller  or  bigger,  thus  the  duration  of  the  corporeal 
frame  haviup  been  settled,  cannot  be  shortened  or  prolonged.  The 
said  fluid  forms  the  constitution,  which  determines  fate  and  shapes 
the  body.  The  Huid  and  the  material  body  pervade  each  other. 
Life  and  deatli  correspond  to  fixed  periods.  The  body  cannot  be 
transformed,  aud  likewise  late  cannot  he  lengtliened  or  shortened. 
We  may  elucidate  the  question  as  to  the  duration  of  liuman  life  by 
observing  the,  potter  and  founder. 

Some  one  might  object  Baying,  "  True,  if  a  potter  uses  his 
stuff  to  make  a  vase,  this  vase,  after  its  completion,  lasts,  until  it 
breaks,  but  cannot  be  formed  anew.  If,  however,  a  fouiuler  casts 
a  plate  out  of  copper,  although  it  be  finished,  it  can  be  melted 
again,  and  be  made  into  a  cup  or,  if  that  is  not  possible,  into  a 
vessel.  Although  men,  who  owe  their  spirits  to  heaven,  all  have 
a  destiny  fixing  their  span,  by  whicli  their  bodies  are  regulated, 
they  can,  if  they  kuow  thv  right  way  and  an  effective  elixir,  change 
their  bodies  and  prolong  tlieir  lives  all  tlie  same." 

I  rt'ply,  '*  If  a  fountler  recasts  a  finished  vessel,  he  must  first 
liquefy  it  in  lire,  before  he  is  able  to  enlarge  or  diminish,  extend 
or  shorten  it.  If  a  man  desiring  to  protract  his  years,  should 
wish  to  be  like  tlie  copper  vessel,  tliere  must  be  some  sort  of  a 
furnace  with  coal,  where  tlie  cliange  and  the  transmutation  of  his 
body  could  take  place.  Tlie  hody  having  been  changed,  the  life- 
time might  also  be  extended.  II ow  could  nii'u,  in  order  to  change 
their  bodies,  undergo  a  smelting  prorcss  like  a  copper  vessel? " 

Tl"'  Li  At  states,  "  \\*ln*n  tlu*  water  pours  down,  one  does 
not  ofler  ii.sh  or  turtles  tor  food."1    Why?    Because,  wlien  the 

1  Li  hi  chap.  I,  No.  1  {('f,il-li),  p.  20 v.  (Leyge'a  translation  Vol.  I,  p.  84.) 
Various  rcisuii^  liavc  Wvw  a.ssig:.cJ  l.y  tlie  commentators  for  this  rule.    They  say, 


igitized  by  Google 


326 


Lun-IUng:  C.  Physical. 


rain  water  rushes  down,  snakes  and  reptiles  are  changed  and  become 
lisli  or  turtles.  Since  tlicy  give  up  their  original  real  nature  and 
are  transformed  only  tor  a  wlnh*,  the  servants  take  care  anil  dare 
not  offer  tliem  to  their  masters  for  food.  Would  men  desirous  of 
liaving  their  bodies  transmuted,  be  satisfieil  with  a  change  like  that 
of  reptiles  and  snakes?  Those  reptiles  which  are  liable  to  a  change 
are  worse  ofr  than  those  which  do  not  cliange  at  all.  Before  they 
change,  they  are  not  eaten  by  men,  but,  when  they  have  been 
transformed  into  fish  and  turtles,  men  oat  them.  Being  eaten, 
their  long  lives  are  cut  sliort,  and  that  is  not  what  people  desire. 

Years  and  months  cliange,  and  the  intrinsic  fluid  may  trans- 
form one  species  into  another.  Frogs  become  quails,  and  sparrows 
turn  into  clams.  Man  longing  for  bodily  trausformation  would  like 
to  resemble  quails  ami  crabs.  These  are  in  the  same  plight  as 
fish  aud  turtles.  Man  fishes  for  crabs  and  eats  them,  when  he 
catches  tliem.  Although  without  a  metainorpliosc  of  the  body,  life 
cannot  be  lengthened,  tiiis  result 1  cannot  be  aimed  at. 

Duke  Niii  At  of  Lu  was  laid  up  witli  a  malady  for  seven  days, 
when  lie  was  transfornicd  into  a  tiger.2  Kun 3  when  banished  to 
Mount  Yu-s/ian  turned  into  a  moose.  Do  those  who  seek  trans- 
formation desire  to  become  a  tiger  like  Niu  At,  or  a  moose  like 
Kun?  The  life  of  a  tiger  or  a  moose  is  not  longer  than  the  human. 
In  this  world  tlie  luunan  nature  is  the  noblest  of  all,  therefore  the 
transmutation  of  a  man  into  a  bird  or  a  beast  cannot  be  desirable. 
It  would  be  a  great  boon,  if  an  old  man  oould  be  transformed  into 
a  youth,  or  if  at  least  the  white  liair  could  turn  black  again,  the 
lost  teeth  grow  once  more,  and  the  animal  forces  be  strengthened, 
so  that  tlie  person  could  .jump  about,  devoid  of  all  decrepitude. 
This  would  be  grand  indml  ！  VVliore  would  be  the  advantage  of 
a  transformation,  if  life  were  not  prolonged  rliereby? 

If  a  thing  is  transformed,  its  concomitant  fluid,  as  it  were,  fa- 
vours the  change.  Human  work  may  produce  new  forms,  it  is  not 
Heaven  which  transforms  things  in  order  to  prolong  their  duration. 
No  more  can  a  transformation  be  brought  about  by  eating  divine 
herbs  or  wonderful  drugs.    A  man  constantly  using  cordials  can 


in  opposition  to  Wang  CKung,  that  during  heavy  rain-falls  fish  are  so  easily  got  as 
not  to  be  valuable,  or  that  then  they  are  muddy  and  not  fit  for  eating.  This  last 
reason  seems  the  most  plausible. 

1  To  become  like  a  qaail  or  a  crab. 

， Quoted  from  Huai  Aon  Tm，  who  adds  that  the  tiger  devoured  his  brother, 
when  he  opened  the  door. 

， A  legendary  minister  of  loo  had  father  to  Great  】'ti. 


zed  by  Google 


Unfonnded  Assertions. 


327 


thereby  merely  strengthen  his  constitution  and  add  to  W\a  years. 
A  sudden  transmutation  is  not  caused  by  the  real  heavenly  fluid 
or  the  true  nature,  with  wliich  men  are  endowed .  Heaven  and 
earth  do  not  change,  sun  and  moon  are  not  transformed,  and  the 
stars  do  not  disappear.  Such  is  their  real  nature.  As  man  lias 
rect'ived  part  of  their  real  fluid,  his  body  cannot  be  transfornuul 
eitlier:  men  do  not  sometimes  become  women,  or  women  men.  A 
high  mound  may  be  turned  into  a  valley,  or  a  deej)  ravine  into  a 
hill.  But  then  the  change  k'.qis  pare  with  human  labour,  it  is  a 
change  by  labour,  not  by  inherent  nature. 

At  the  rise  of  the  Han  dynasty,  an  old  man  presented  ('/unig 
Liang 1  with  a  hook,  and  tlicn  、vas  transformed  into  a  stone.  There- 
fore the  essence  of  a  stone  was  a  propitious  omen  for  tlie  rising 
Han.  Similarly  tl"、  essence  of"  the  River 2  Ijccame  a  man  who  gave 
a  jade-badge  to  the  envoy  of  C/iin,  w  hich  was  an  unlucky  augury, 
indicating  the  downfall  of  Ch  in.* 

The  silkworm  feeds  on  mulberry  leaves,  when  it  grows  old, 
it  sets  to  spinning,  and  becomes  a  cocoon,  and  tlie  cocoon  again 
is  changed  into  a  moth.  The  moth  has  two  wings,  and  in  its 
altered  form  widely  differs  from  the  silkworm.  Grubs  t'liaiige  into 
chrysalisses,  and  these  turn  into  crickets.  The  crickets  are  born 
with  two  wings,  and  are  not  of  tlie  same  type  as  grubs.  A  great 
many  of  all  worms  and  insects  alter  their  shapes  and  transform 
their  bodies.  Man  alone  is  not  metamorphosed,  being  the  reci|)U'nt 
of  the  real  heavenly  fluid.  Born  as  a  child,  he  »iows  into  a  man, 
and,  wlien  he  is  old,  into  greybeard.  From  birth  to  deatli 
there  is  no  metamorphose,  for  such  is  his  original  nature.  Creatures 
which '  by  their  nature  are  not  transformed,  rannot  be  induced  to 
do  so,  whereas  those  whicli  must  pass  through  a  metamorphose, 
cannot  forego  it.  Now,  the  length  of  life  of  those  transformed 
creatures  does  not  compare  favourably  with  that  of  non-transformed 
ones.  Nothing  would  be  said,  if  a  man  desirous  of  a  metamorphose 
could  tliereby  prolong  his  years,  but  if  he  only  changes  his  body 
without  increasing  his  years,  lie  would  be  merely  on  a  level  witli 
crickets.    Why  should  he  like  this? 

Dragons  arc  reptiles  wliich  appear  sometimes,  and  then  again 
become  invisible,  and  wliich  sometimes  arc  long  and  sometimes  short. 
It  is  in  their  nature  to  undergo  trans  forma  tious,  but  not  for  good, 

1  An  adherent  of  the  founder  of  the  Han  dynasty.   The  Taoists  have  claimed 
him  as  one  of  their  patriarelis  and  mystics.    See  p.  235. 
1  The  Yellow  Uiter. 
i  Tli is  event  is  told  in  detail  on  p.  233. 


Digitized  by  Google 


328 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


since  after  a  short  、vhile，  they  relapse  into  their  previous  state. 
Krgo,  every  thing  considered,  w<»  find  that  the  human  being,  endmved 
with  an  unchangeable  body,  is  not  liable  to  metamorphoses,  and 
that  his  years  (rannot  be  prolonged. 

Kao  Thtmg 1  having  witnessed  the  abnormal  growth  of  a  paper 
mulberry,5  is  reported  to  have  repented  of  his  faults,  changed  (Ik* 
style  of  government,  and  enjoyed  Iiapjiiness  for  one  hundred  years? 
This  is  not  correct.  Of  Duke  C/ting  of  Sunff '  it  is  said  that  on  his 
having  uttered  three  excellent  maxims,  tlu*  plaut't  left  out 

three  solar  mansions,  and  twenty  one  years  were  added  to  the  duke's 
life,6  which  is  likewise  unfounded.  Duke  Mu  of  Ch  in "  is  believed 
to  have  been  rewarded  by  God 7  with  nineteen  extra  years  on  ac- 
count of  his  conspicuous  virtue,  an  untruth  too.  Ch'Vi  Sung6  and 
Waug  Cfiiao,9  they  say,  became  genii  by  their  love  of  T"o，  ami 
lived  on  without  djnng.  also  a  falsehood. 

Let  us  suppost'  that  a  man  is  born,  gets  a  body,  and  is  ijivon 
the  name  A,  then  he  always  preserves  this  body  called  A  througlj 
his  whole  life  up  to  his  death.  Adherents  of  Tao  are  said  to  have 
become  genii,  but  it  never  lias  happened  that  A  was  transforinetl 
into  B:  neither  can  the  body  pass  through  a  inetamorplioso,  nor 
years  be  added.  Who  re  fore?  Because  of  tlie  body,  the  vital  force, 
and  the  constitution,  wliioli  are  from  heaven.    The  body  l)fing 


1  Posthumous  name  of  the  Shang  emperor  Wu  Ting,  1324-1265  b.c. 

， A  paper  mulberry  tree  grew  in  the  court  of  the  Etnpcror,  which  liad  two 
spans  of  circumferen  ce  on  the  second  day  already.  This  was,  of  course,  regarded 
as  a  portent    Cf.  Lwi^g  Bk.  V,  p.  1  (Yi  Hsu)  where  the  legend  is  told  in  full. 

s  According  to  the  Shuking  Pt.  V,  Bk.  XV  (Uyye  Vol.  HI,  Pt.  II，  p.  4G7)  Kao 
T$ung  reigned  59  years. 

4  515-451  b.c. 

6  This  story  is  told  in  full  in  Lun-hr'ng  Bk.  IV，  p.  9 v.  which  seems  quoted 
from  Huai  Nan  T^e  XII,  1  Iv.  The  planet  Mars  being  in  the  constellation  of  the 
" Heart,"  the  astrologer  Tse  Wei  informed  the  Duke  that  Heaven  was  going  to 
indict  a  punishnient  upon  him,  advising  him,  liowever,  to  shift  this  misfortune  on  his 
prime  minister,  or  on  his  people,  or  on  the  year.  The  prinrc  thrice  declined  to 
allow  others  to  suffer  in  his  stead,  giving  hi.s  reasons  for  each  refusal.  These  are 
the  three  good  maxims  of  our  text.  TV  Wei  then  changed  and  congratulated  the 
Duke,  saying  that  Heaven  had  hoard  tlie  three  excellent  sentiments  uttered  by  him, 
that  the  same  night  it  would  caiu>e  Mars  to  \rdas  through  three  solar  mansions,  and 
that  it  would  add  twenty-one  years  to  his  IifcT  each  mansion  consisting  of  seven 
stars  and  each  star  representing  one  year. 

*  058-619  b.c. 

7  Shang  Ti，  the  supreme  being,  God. 

8  A  magician  of  the  time  of  ShM  Nu，、g. 

n  A  prince  of  Chin  571  b.c,  who  became  a  Taoist  and  an  immortal.  He  was 
seen  riding  ilirough  the  air  upon  a  white  craue.    Maytr^  No.  801. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Unfounded  Assertions. 


329 


spring,  the  vital  force  is  summer.1  Man's  lifetime  is  the  outcome 
of  his  vitality.  The  body  follows  the  vital  force  in  its  actions.  If 
the  vital  force  and  the  constitution  are  not  the  same,  there  must 
be  a  diversity  in  the  bodies  also.  Tlic  life  of  an  ox  is  half  as 
long  as  that  of  a  horse,  and  a  ho^c  lives  half  as  long  as  man. 
Therefore,  the  outward  forms  of  tlie  ox  and  the  horse  must  be 
different  from  the  human.  Ilaviuy;  obtained  the  sliape  of  an  ox 
or  a  horse,  one  cannot  but  gt"t  th«'ir  spans  too.  As  oxen  and  liorses 
do  not  cliange  into  men,  their  litVtime  is  also  shorter  tlian  tliat  of 
liuman  beings. 

Because  of  Kao  Tstmg  and  tlie  like  it  is  not  stated  that  they 
underwent  a  transiuutntion,  but  simply  that  tlieir  lifetime  was  leng- 
tliened,  people  put  faith  in  these  reports.  The  force  pulsating  in 
tlie  veins  of  the  body  is  like  rice  hoarded  up  iu  a  sack.  The  bulk 
of  a  picul  sack  also  corresponds  to  a  picul.  If"  rice  be  taken  away 
or  more  added,  the  sack  appears  smaller  or  bigger.  The  vital  force 
determines  the  length  of  the  liuman  life.  It  is  like  tlie  rice,  and 
the  body  like  tlie  sack.  In  order  to  increase  or  diminish  the  life- 
time, the  body  too  must  become  bigger  or  thinner,  it  cannot  remain 
the  same.  Should  anybody  think  the  human  body  to  be  quite 
differont  from  a  sack,  and  that  the  vital  force  cannot  well  be  com- 
pared to  rice,  w  o  may  still  take  anotlior  illustration  from  a  gourd. 
The  juice  of  a  gourd  is  like  tlie  】mman  blood,  its  pulp  like  flesh. 
Now,  let  a  man  take  away  or  add  some  juice  but  so  that  the 
gourd  s  form  remains  unaltered:  1"'  will  be  unable  to  perform  this. 
It  being  impossible  to  man  to  diminish  or  to  replenish  the  juice 
of  tlie  gourd,  how  can  Heaven  «*xterul  or  curtail  tlie  human  span? 
As  the  human  life  can  neither  be  lengthonecl  nor  shortened,  who 
could  have  done  8u<-li  a  thing  in  the  case  of  Kao  Tsung  and  others, 
so  that  we  might  spoak  of  an  iiioie<tsc  of  years?  The  assertion 
that  Kao  Tsung  and  others  were  mi'tamorpliosrd,  aud  their  years 
increased  would  after  all  be  credible,  but  the  statement  advanced 
wow  that  tlieir  years  w  ere  prolonged,  no  mention  hv'\w^  made  of  any 
transformation  of  tlieir  bodies,  is  past  all  belief  for  the  following 
reason: 

Man  receives  the  vital  force  from  Heaven.  When  it  is  com- 
plete, the  body  is  infonmul.  Durinu  lile  botli  work  harmoniously 
together  up  to  tlie  last,  dt-atli.  Sim'e  the  body  cannot  be  trans- 
formetl,  tlie  years  cannot  be  increased  either.    As  long  as  man 


1  The  meaning  is.  as  summer  is  preceded  by  spring,  thus  the  body  exists 
before  it  is  iufoniied  by  the  vital  force. 


igitized  by  Google 


Lun- Wng:  P.  Phvsiral. 


lives,  he  can  move,  but  when  he  dies,  lie  collapses.  At  deatli  the 
vital  force  vanishes,  and  the  body  is  dissolved  and  decomposed. 
As  a  man,  while  in  possession  of  life,  cannot  bp  metamorphosed, 
how  should  his  years  be  prolonged  ？ 

Wlmt  clmngcs  on  tlie  body  fr<»ni  birth  to  old  age  is  the  hair 
and  the  skin.  The  youth's  hair  is  black,  the  aged  man's,  wliite. 
Later  on,  it  turns  yellow.  But  this  change  concerns  the  hair  alone, 
not  the  body.  A  youngster  lias  a  white  skin,  an  old  man  a  dark 
one,  which,  later  on,  becomes  blackish,  as  if  covered  with  dust. 
Respecting  the  yellow  hair  and  the  dusty  skin  the  Li-ki  says:  "  We 
will  have  yellow  hair  and  wizened  faces  indefinitely. " 1  If  the 
hair  changes,  people  reach  an  old  age  and  die  late.  Despite  this, 
bones  and  flesh  do  not  change;  the  limit  of  life  being  reached, 
death  ensues. 

From  amongst  the  five  elements  earth  alone  admits  of  several 
transformations.  Moistened  witli  water,  it  can  be  sliajied  into  a 
horse,  and  tlii.s  a^ain  be  altered  into  a  human  being,  but  be  it 
noted  that  it  must  not  yet  have  been  put  in  a  kiln  and  burned. 
If,  after  having  been  modelled  as  a  utensil,  it  lias  already  been 
hardened  by  burning  in  the  kiln,  a  new  transformation  is  out  of 
the  question.  Now,  man  may  be  thought  of  as  having  been  baked 
and  moulded  in  the  furnace  of  Heaven  and  Earth.  How  can  he 
still  undergo  a  change  after  his  uhapo  has  been  fixed  ？ 

In  representing  the  bodies  of  genii  one  gives  them  a  plumage, 
and  their  arms  are  clianged  into  wings  with  which  they  poise  in 
the  clouds.  This  means  an  extension  of  their  lifetime.  They  are 
belie  veil  not  to  die  for  a  thousand  years.  These  pictures  are  false, 
for  there  are  not  only  false  reports  in  the  world,  but  also  fan«!y 
pictures.  However,  man  in  reality  does  not  belong  to  the  <-Iass 
of  crickets  ami  moths.  In  the  thirty-five  kingdoms  beyond  the  sea 
there  live  plumigerous  and  feat  ho  ml  tribes.  Feathered  relates  to 
tlieir  pinions.2  These  people  art、  the  produce  of  their  soil,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  thoir  bodies  were  covered  witli  plumage  and  feathers 
through  the  influence  of  Too.     Yil%  and  Yi*  visited  Hsi  Wang  Mu,b 

' This  verse  does  not  occur  in  the  Lifci,  but  in  the  Shiking  Pt.  IV,  Bk.  Ill, 
Ode  II  (L^pffe,  (  7«j».»ir.v  Vol.  IV,  Pt.  II,  p.  (Y.ir>)  ： ― •'  He  (the  ancestor)  will  bless  us  with 
the  eyebrows  of  longevity.  —  We  will  have  yellow  hair  and  wizened  face*  indefinitely.'* 

a  Fore  more  details  see  the  Shan- hai- king. 

s  Great  2205-2107. 

*  A  minister  of  F«. 

*  A  Taoist  goddess.  Cf.  my  article  "  Mu  Wanff  und  die  Koniffin  von  Saba " 
Ui  the  Mittriltrngen  <i'.s  S<，n;ti(v''  fur  Orifntalische  St  rachm  ztt  Berlin  Vol.  VII,  1904. 


Digitized  by  CjOO 


Unfoanded  Assertions. 


331 


but  she  is  not  reported  to  have  had  a  plumage  or  feathers.  There 
are  also  immortals  in  foreign  countries,  but  thoy  are  not  descrilted 
lis  having  a  plumage  and  feathers,  and,  conversely,  the  plumigerous 
and  featliered  tribes  arc  not  said  to  he  immortal.  As  plumago  and 
feathers  are  not  ascribed  to  tlio  immortals,  these  attributes  cannot 
imply  immortality.  How  then  van  it  be  inferred  that  the  genii 
must  live  for  ever,  because  they  liave  wings? 


332 


Lun-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 
Taoist  Untruths  {Tao-hsii). 

In  the  books  of  the  Literati  it  is  stated  that 1  Huang  Ti  ex- 
ploited tlic  copper  mines  of  Mount  S/iou,'2  and  out  of  the  <irc 
cast  tripods  at  tlie  foot  <»1*  the  Ching  Mountain. :!  When  tlie  tripods 
were  completed,  a  dragon  with  a  long  beard  came  down,  and  went 
to  mt»et  Huang  Tl.  IIuwkj  Ti  inountod  the  dragou.  His  whole  suite 
includinji;  tlie  Iiarem,  over  seventy  persons  iii  all,  mounted  together 
with  liim.  \vhereu[)on  the  dragon  ascended.  The  remaining  smaller 
officials,  who  could  not  find  a  sea t  on  tlie  dragon,  all  got  hold  of 
the  dragon's  beard,  wliich  thev  pulled  out.  Huang  lis  bow  fell 
down.  The  people  gaz(，（l  after  liim,  until  he  disappeared  in  the  sky. 
Then  they  hugged  liis  bow,  and  tlie  dnigon's  beard,  and  moaned. 
Tlierofon*  later  ag»'3  named  the  place  Tiny-lin  (Tripod  l„ake)  *  and 
the  bow  of  the  emperor  Wu-hno  (Haven's  (，ry).& 

The  G rami  Annalist  in  his  eulogy  on  the  Five  Emperors^  also 
says  that  having  performed  the  hill-sacrifice  Ibiatuj  Ti  disappeared 
as  a  genius,  ami  tliat  liis  followers  paid  tlieir  respect  to  his  garments 
and  cap,  and  afterwards  buried  tln'in.7   I  say  that  this  is  not  true. 

1  The  following  story  is  taken  from  the  Shi-vhi,  rhap.  2S,  p.  28  v.,  where  an 
official  relates  it  to  Han  VV"  Ti.    Cf.  ('hnramif,  Hi".  Vol.  Ill,  p.  488. 

y   In  S/ian»i  Province,  near  lr u-chou-fti. 
3  Tliis  mountain  lies  in  '、.Am、'.,  near  ll  i-an-fu. 

， The  context  reciuires 將 胡 «'  Tripod  beard,"  but  we  read 湖 instead 

uf  A  \Aavo,  called  1^1  j/|)J  "  Tr  ipod  lake  "  actually  exists  in  Ho»an  (H.iyfair 

('itics  and  l'owns  No.  7HJ!>).  This  mm"'  lias  pcrliaps  hecu  the  origin  of  tlic  legend, 
as  W'anf/  (  'liun,j  s"g'、'<\,|s  (.•!'.  al>ovc  p.  Wl'l).  In  ancient  times  only  the  phonetic  part 
of  a  character  was  ui'irii  written,  and  the  radical  loft  out.    Thus  ""胡 could  stand 

lor  "  l)card  "  as  wdl  a.,  for  '-  lake."    Our  tfxt  has  ^  ^|  the  "beard." 

Some  coniim-ntators  hold  tliat  the  naint'  W  uJmo  ^  rr.  Raven's  Cry 
refers  to  tin-  l.inifiit  of  tlie  i"、opk'，  i.tlicrs  that  it  was  the  name  of  a  tree  well  fit 
tor  tlie  fabrication  of  hows. 

r-  Ukuhj  I'i.  (  hit  I  u>  //  ii,  h '  t, ,  Yao,  and  Slim.  Accord  ing  to  other  writers 
the  Five  l>ni|joiTirs  ； in':— -  7"m  //〃",  )  tn  T;，  JI  oru/  Ti,  Shao  1  l"o,  and  (  huan  Hsu. 

■  Shi-vh,  fl.ap.  2s,  p.  :;"、'•  Wden  (  h  in  Shift  Uuan»j  Ti  had  sacrificed  on  the 
tomb  of  lliaug  Ti  uyon  Mount  (  h  no,  he  iisked,  how  Huang  Ti  could  be  an  immortal, 
:m(l  yet  !)<■  lmriod 【！ icrcv  Thou  someUody  replied  tliat  Huang  Ti  had  ascended  tb 
liea\fti  ：卜 a  g<Miius,  and  tfi.it  only  l'i.、  ^aniifiiis  and         were  left  and  inttiTed. 


zed  by  Google 


Taoist  Untniths. 


What  does  Huang  Ti  really  mean  ？  Is  it  an  appellative  or  a 
posthumous  title?  Being  a  posthumous  title  it  must  be  some  praise 
bestowed  upon  him  by  liis  subjects,  for  this  kind  of  title  is  a  glori- 
fication of  what  the  deceased  has  done  during  his  life-time.  Huang 
Ti  was  a  votary  of  Too. 1  and  subsequently,  as  they  say,  rose  to 
Heaven.  If  his  subjects  wanted  to  honour  him,  tliey  ought  not  to 
have  styled  him  Huang,  but  ought  to  have,  given  him  a  title  im- 
plying his  ascension  as  an  immortal. 

According  to  the  rules  for  honorary  titles  the  pacification  of 
the  people  would  be  called  Huang,  which  means  that  he  who  is 
styled  so  kept  the  people  at  peace,'2  hut  the  word  does  not  denote 
the  acquisition  of  Tao.  Among  the  many  emperors  those  given  to 
arts  and  literature  were  ciilled  i.  e.  Scholarly,  those  fond  of 
War  Wu  i.  e.  Warriors.  Both  designations  had  their  real  basis. 
They  served  to  exhort  others  to  do  the  like. 

If  at  the  time  of  Huang  Ti  posthumous  titles  were  not  yet 
given  according  to  qualities,  of  what  generation  were  those  who 
first  called  him  Huang  Ti  ？  Huang  Ti's  own  subjects  must  liave  known 
their  'prince,  and  later  generations  could  trace  his  doings.  Although 
our  doubts  about  the  existence  of  appellatives  and  posthumous  titles 
at  Huang  'fis  time  may  not  be  set  at  rest,  at  all  events  it  is  evident 
that  Huang  cannot  mean  an  Immortal  who  rose  to  Heaven. 

A  dragon  does  not  rise  to  Heaven.  If  11 麵 g  Ti  rode  on  a 
dragon,  it  ia  clear  that  he  could  not  have  ascended  to  Heaven 
either.  When  a  dragon  rises,  clouds  and  rain  appear  simultaneously 
and  carry  it  along.  As  soon  as  clouds  disperse,  and  the  rain 
stops,  the  dragon  comes  down  again,  and  re-enters  its  pond.  Should 
Huang  Ti  really  have  ridden  on  a  dragon,  he  would  aftenvards 
have  been  drowned  with  the  dragon  in  the  pond. 

Huang  Ti  was  interred  in  the  Chiao  Mountain,3  and  still  they 
say  that  his  officials  buried  his  garments  and  cap.  If  lie  actually 
went  up  to  Heaven  on  a  dragon,  his  garments  and  cap  cannot  have 
separated  from  his  body,  and  if  lie  became  a  genius  after  the  hill 
sacrifice  and  vanished,  lie  cannot  have  left  liis  garments  and  cap 


1  The  fundamental  principle  of  Taoism.  The  Taoists  have  always  claimed 
Huang  Ti  aa  one  of  theirs.    Hence  the  legend  of  his  ascension  to  heaven. 

8  This  aeems  to  me  a  fancy  ftyiitology.  Iluany  is  "  yellow,"  but  never 
mcaiM  "  to  pacify."  The  "  Yellow  Fmperor  "  was  called  yellow  from  the  colour  of 
the  earth,  over  which  he  ruled.  Thus  the  name  is  generally  explained,  whether 
correctly  is  doubtful. 

， Some  say  that  this  mountain  Is  situated  in  the  province  of  Kanm,  others 
more  eastward  in  the  province  of  Slumi.    V'"/.  Shi-cht  chap.  1  ，  p.  ». 


gitized  by  Google 


334 


Lun-Hfng:  C.  Physical. 


behind  either.  Did  Hwmg  'It  really  become  a  genius,  who  could 
not  die,  but  rose  to  Heaven,  liis  ofticoi-s  and  people  must  havr  seeu 
it  with  their  own  eyes.  Having  thus  witnessed  his  ascension  to 
Heaven,  tliey  decidedly  knew  that  he  did  not  die.  Now,  to  bury 
the  garments  and  cap  of  somebody,  who  did  not  die,  would  have 
been,  as  if  lie  had  died.  8iicli  :i  thing  would  not  liave  been  in 
accordance  with  the  feelinjjs  of  the  officials,  who  were  aware  of 

O  ， 

tho  real  state  of  affairs,  und  could  distinguish  between  life  and  death. 

It  is  on  record  that  the  seventy-two  sovereigns  who  asoeiuled 
31ount  T  f".,1  had  troubled  and  toiled,  worrying  themselves  over  the 
state  of  the  empire.  Subsequently  their  ert*orts  were  ('nnvned  with 
success,  and  things  settled,  so  that  universal  peace  reigned  throughout 
tlie  land.  When  there  was  universal  peace,  the  whole  cmpiro  en- 
joyed harmony  and  tranquillity.  Then  they  ascended  tlie  T  al-shon, 
and  perforau'd  tlie  hi U-sacri fires.  Now,  tlie  pursuit  of  Tno  and  the 
struggle  for  iininoctality  are  diirereiit  lVom  the  vexations  of  official 
lil'e  and  luisiness.  He  whose  thoughts  all  centre  in  Tm>、  forgets 
worldly  a  flairs,  because  to  trouble  about  them  would  injure  his 
nature.2  They  say  that  Yao  looked  dried  up  atul  Slum  withered. 
Their  hearts  were  sorrowful,  and  their  bodies  feeble  and  care-worn. 
If  Huong  Ti  brought  about  universal  peace,  his  appearance  must 
have  been  similar  to  that  of  Yao  and  Shun.  Since  Yao  and  S/mn 
did  not  attain  to  Too,  it  cannot  he  true  that  llmug  Ti  rose  to 
Heaven.3  If  Huwkj  Ti  in  his  pursuit  of  Tno  m'glei'"'<l  all  wordlv 
affairs,  Ins  mind  would  have  been  cquanimous.  and  I  lis  body  fat 
and  strong.  Then  he  wouUl  have  been  quite  di  ire  rent  from  Ytio  and 
Shun,  and  oonseqiicntlv  liis  acliioveinents  rould  not  have  been  the 
same.  In  that  case  the  universe  would  not  have  enjoyed  universal 
peace.  Witliout  the  universal  peace  liis  sacrifice  on  the  mouutain 
would  not  have  taken  plarf.4 

The  Five  Emperors  ami  Tliree  Rulers  were  all  remarkable  for 
their  wistlom  and  virtue,  Hnauy  Ti  not  more  than  the  otliei>. 】f 
all  tlie  sages  became  genii,  IUuukj  Ti  would  not  be  one  alone,  and 
if  the  sages  did  not  become  genii,  why  sliould  Htumff  Ti  alone  be 


1  China's  most  sacred  nioiuitain  in  Shantung, 

*  Taoism  inculcates  cotitcmplation  and  quietism,  and  abhors  an  active  life. 
8  Ooly  lie  who  possesses  7V'o，  becomes  immortal,  and  can  ascend  to  heaven. 

If  the  model  emperors  I'm'  and  Shun  did  not  attain  to  Tao,  why  should  Huang  Ti, 
provided  that  he  worked  a.s  hard  as  y<w  and  Shun. 

*  The  hill-sacrifice, 封 was  not  performed,  unless  the  empire  enjoyed 
peace,  and  peace  could  not  be  secured  without  hard  work.  Hard  work  precluded 
a  Tao  1st  life,  and  without  Tao,  Hwtng  Ti  could  not  a->*ceiid  on  liigli. 


igitized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untruths. 


a  genius?  People  seeing  that  Huang  Ti  was  very  partial  to  magical 
arts,  winch  are  practised  by  genii,  surmised  that  he  was  a  genius. 

Moreover,  on  finding  the  name  of  "  Tiug-hu  "  "  Tripod  beard  ，， 1 
they  said  that  Huang  Ti  exploited  tlic  copper  of  Mount  S/iou%  and 
cast  it  into  tripods,  and  that  a  dragon  with  a  floating  beard  came 
to  meet  him.  This  explanation  would  be  on  the  same  line  with 
that  of  the  K'uei-chi  Mountain.2  The  purport  of  the  name  of  this 
mountain  is  said  to  be  that  the  emperor  Yil  of  the  Hsia  dynasty 
ou  a  tour  of  inspection  held  a  meeting  (會) and  a  review  (稽) on 
this  mountain,  whence  its  uame  K' uei-c/ii.3  Yn  went  to  KHel-thi  for 
the  purpose  of  regulating  the  water  courses,  but  not  on  a  tour  of 
inspection,  just  as  Huang  Ti  was  addicted  to  magic,  but  did  not 
ascend  to  heaven.  There  was  no  such  thing  like  a  meeting  or  a 
review,  as  there  was  no  casting  of  tripods,  nor  a  dragon  with  a 
long  beard.  There  is  a  village  called  S/t^ng-mu  "  Vanquish  mother." 
Does  that  mean  that  there  was  really  a  son  who  vanquished  his 
mother?  A  city  is  called  Chao-ko  "  Morning  song."  Are  we  to  inter 
that  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  used  to  sing,  when  they  rose  in 
the  morning?  - 


The  books  of  the  Literati  relate  that  the  Prince  of  Huai-nan 4 
in  his  study  of  Taoism  assembled  all  the  Taoists  of  the  empire, 
and  humbled  the  grandeur  of  a  princedom  before  the  expositors  of 
Taoist  lore.  Consequently,  Taoist  scholars  flocked  to  Huai-nan  and 
vied  with  each  other  in  exhibiting  strange  tricks  and  all  kinds  of 
miracles.  Then  the  prince  attained  to  Too  and  rose  to  heaven  with 
his  whole  household.  His  domestic  animals  became  genii  too.  His 
tlogs  barked  up  in  the  sky,  and  the  cocks  crowed  in  the  clouds. 
That  means  that  there  was  sucli  plenty  of  the  drug  of  immortality, 
that  dogs  and  cocks  could  eat  of  it,  and  follow  the  prince  to 
Heaven.  All  who  have  a  fa<l  for  Taoism  and  would  learn  the  art 
of  immortality  believe  in  this  story,  but  it  is  not  true. 

Man  is  a  creature.  His  rank  may  be  ever  so  high,  even  princely 
or  royal,  his  nature  cannot  be  (lirtVrent  from  that  of  other  creatures. 
There  is  no  creature  but  dios.    How  could  man  become  an  ira- 

1  The  text  says  "  Tripod  lake."    Cf.  above  p.  332. 
， ^fe.    Iu  the  province  of  Cftekiang. 

， This  etymology  is  given  by  Sse  Ma  f'hiien,  Shi-chi  chap.  2,  p.  26. 

4  Liu  An,  Prince  of  Huai-nan,  commonly  known  as  fluai  Nan  T.、e,  a  Taoist 
philosopher  and  alchymist  of  the  2nd  cent.  n.v.  He  was  a  prince  of  the  imperial 
i'amily  of  tlie  Han  einperorti.    His  prinoipiility  was  situatud  in  Anhut. 


igitized  by  Google 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


、 mortal?  Birds  having  foatliers  and  plumes  can  fly,  but  they  cannot 
rise  to  Ht'avt'u.  Mow  should  man  without  feathers  and  plumes  be 
able  to  fly  and  rise?  Were  lie  fe.'Uhereil  aiul  winged,  lie  wouKl 
only  b<-  equal  to  birds,  but  he  is  riot;  how  then  should  he  ascend 
to  lioa veu? 

Oeaturt's  capable  of  flying  and  rising,  are  provided  witli 
leathers  and  wings,  otlicre  f.ist  at  running,  have  hoofs  and  strong 
feet.  Swift  runners  cannot  (ly,  and  flyers  not  run.  Their  bodies 
an*  difrerently  organised  a  chortling  to  tlie  fluid  they  are  endowed 
with.  Now  man  is  a  swift  runner  by  nature,  therefore  lie  does 
not  grow  foatliers  or  plumes.  From  tin?  time  he  is  full-grown  up 
till  his  old  age  lie  never  gets  them  by  any  miracle.  If  amongst 
the  believers  in  Taoism  and  th<*  students  of  the  art  of  immortality 
some  lx'came  feaUicred  and  wingrd,  they  might  eventually  fly  and 
rise  alter  all. 

In  case  the  nature  of  creatures  could  be  changed,  it  ought  to 
be  possible  that  metal,  wood,  water,  and  fire  were  also  altered.1 
Frogs  can  be  changed  into  quails,  and  sparrows  dive  into  the  water 
and  become  clams.2  It  is  the  upshot  of  their  spontaneous,  original 
nature,  and  rannot  be  attained  by  the  study  of  Too.  Lost  the 
Taoists  should  be  put  on  a  level  with  the  aforesaid  animals,  I  say 
that,  if  men  could  have  all  the  necessary  lVatliers  and  plumage,  they 
might  ascend  to  heaven. 

Now.  the  growth  and  dcvi'lopmtMit  of  creatures  is  not  abrupt, 
and  its  changes  are  not  violent,  l>ut  gradually  brought  about.  If 
the  Taoists  and  students  of  immortality  could  first  grow  fVathprs 
ami  plumes  several  inchei*  long,  so  that  tlioy  could  skim  over  the 
earth,  and  risr  to  the  trrrart's  «>f  high  buildings,  one  might  bflieve 
that  they  can  asceiul  to  heaven.  But  they  do  not  show  that  they 
an;  able  to  fly  even  a  small  distance.  How  can  they  suddenly 
acquire  the  faculty  of  flying  such  a  lotiij  way  through  the  study  of 
their  ininiculoiis  ;irt«  without  any  gradual  progress?  That  sucli  a 
great  result  might  be  really  efFected  by  means  of  feathers  and  wings 
cannot  he  ascertained. 

The  human  hair  ami  beard,  and  tlie  diflferent  colours  of  tliiugs, 
when  young  and  okl,  aflbrd  aiiotlicr  rue.  AV  hen  a  plant  comes  out, 
it  has  a  green  colour,  when  it  rip«'ns.  it  looks  yellow.  As  long  as 
man  is  young,  his  hair  is  black,  when  he  grows  old,  it  turns  white. 

1  The  elements  of  wliicli  the  bodies  of  all  creatures  are  composed  cannot  be 
transformed,  therefore  tliose  <-icaturcs  rannot  cliange  their  nature. 

- Tlie.se  nietainorplioses  are  inentioncd  in  ancient  works,  and  believed  by  tlie 
Cliinese  up  to  tlie  ptcsein  day.    Ci*.  p.  :{'—>". 


Digitized  by  CjOO 


Taoist  Untruths. 


337 


Yellow  is  the  sign  of  maturity,  white  of  old  age.  After  a  plant 
has  become  yellow,  it  may  be  watered  and  tended  ever  so  much, 
it  does  not  become  green  again.  When  the  hair  has  turned  white, 
no  eating  of  drugs  nor  any  care  bestowed  upon  one's  nature  can 
make  it  black  again.  Black  and  green  do  not  come  back,  how 
could  age  and  decrepitude  be  laid  aside? 

Yellow  and  white  are  like  the  frying  of  raw  meat,  and  the 
cooking  of  fresh  fish.  What  has  been  fried,  cannot  be  caused  to 
become  raw  again,  and  what  has  been  cooked,  to  become  fresh. 
Fresh  and  raw  correspouil  to  young  and  strong,  fried  and  cooked, 
to  weak  and  old.  Heaven  in  developing  things  can  keep  them 
vigorous  up  till  autumn,  but  not  further  on  till  next  spring.  By 
swallowing  drugs  and  nourishing  one's  nature  one  may  get  rid  of 
sickness,  but  one.  cannot  prolong  one's  life,  and  become  an  immortal. 
Immortals  have  a  light  body  and  strong  vital  energy,  and  yet  they 
cannot  rise  to  heaven.  Light  and  strong  though  they  be,  they  are 
not  provided  with  feathers  and  wings,  and  therefore  not  able  to 
ascend  to  heaven. 

Heaven  and  earth  are  both  bodies.  As  one  cannot  descend 
into  the  earth,  one  cannot  ascend  into  heaven.  Such  being  tlie 
case,  where  would  be  a  road  leading  up  to  heaven ？  Man  is  not 
stroug  enough  to  enter  and  pass  through  heaven's  body.  If  the 
gate  of  heaven  is  in  the  North-west,  all  people  rising  to  heaven 
must  pass  by  the  K'un-lun  Mountain.  The  State  of  Hum  Nan  Tse 
being  situated  in  the  South-east  of  tlie  earth,  he  must,  if  lie  really 
ascended  to  heaven,  first  have  gone  to  K  un-lun  with  all  his  house- 
hold, where  he  would  have  found  an  ascent.  Provided  the  Prince 
of  Ihiai-nan  flew  straight  across  tlie  land  to  the  nortli-western  corner, 
flapping  his  wings,  then  he  must  have  liad  feathers  and  wings. 
But  since  uo  mention  is  made  of  liis  passing  by  the  K'.  un-lun,  nor 
of  feathers  and  wings  growing  out  of  bis  body,  the  mere  assertion 
of  his  ascension  cannot  be  but  wrong  and  untrue. 

Liu  An,  prince  of  -膽， lived  contemporaneously  with  tlie 
emperor  Hsiao  Wu  7i.1  His  father  Liu  Chang  was  banished  to  Yen- 
too'1  in  Shu^  for  some  offeuce,  but  died  on  the  road,  when  he  ar- 
rived at  Yung-chou.4  Liu  An,  who  succeeded  him  in  his  princedom, 
bore  a  grudge  against  the  emperor  for  having  caused  his  father's 

i  140-86  b.c. 

， The  modem  Ya-chou~fu. 

3  An  old  kingdom  in  S»echtum. 

4  One  of  the  Nine  Provinces,  into  which  Yu  divided  the  Empire,  comprising 
Shensi  and  Kanm. 

Lun  •  Heng.  '£i 


Digitized  by  Google 


338  Lnn-Heng:  C.  Physical. 

death  in  exile,  and  thought  of  making  rebellion.  He  attracted  all 
sorts  of  schemers,  and  intended  great  things.  Men  like  Wu  Pei  filled 
his  palaces,  busy  in  writing  books  on  the  Taoist  arts,  and  publishing 
essays  on  the  most  miraculous  subjects.  Tliey  were  bustling  about 
and  putting  their  heads  together. 

In  the  "  Memoir  of  the  Eight  Companions " 1  they  wished  to 
prove  supernatural  forces,  as  if  tlicy  liad  attained  to  Too.  But  they 
never  reached  it,  and  had  no  success.  Then  Httai  Nan  Tse  plotted 
a  rebellion  together  with  Wu  Pei.  The  scheme  was  discovered,  and 
lie  committed  suicide  or.  &a  some  say,  was  done  to  death.  Whether 
this  be  the  case,  or  whether  he  committed  suicide  is  about  the 
sam e.  But  people  finding  his  writings  very  deep,  abstruse,  and 
mysterious,  and  believing  that  tlie  predictions  of  the  "  Pa-kung- 
chuan  •'  had  been  fulfilled,  divulged  tlie  story  that  he  had  become 
a  genius,  and  went  up  to  heaven,  which  is  not  in  accordance 
with  truth. 


It  is  chronicled  in  the  books  of  the  Literati 2  that  Lu  .4o,3 
when  wandering  near  the  "  Northern  Sea," 4  passed  the  "  Great 
North,"  and  through  the  "Dark  Gate"5  entered  upon  the  Mon- 
golean H  plateau.  There  he  beheld  an  individual  witli  deep  eyes, 
a  black  nose  and  the  neck  of  a  wild  goose.  Lifting  his  shoulders, 
be  soared  up,  and  rapidly  came  down  again,  gamboling  and  dis- 
porting all  the  time  against  the  wind.  When  he  caught  sight  of 
Lu  Ao,  he  suddenly  took  down  his  arms,  and  sought  refuge  under 
a  rock.  Lu  Ao  saw  him  there  resting  on  the  back  of,  a  tortoise 
and  eating  an  oyster. 

Lu  Ao  accosted  him  saying,  "  Sir,  I  believe  that,  because  1 
have  given  up  what  the  world  desires,  separating  from  my  kindred 
and  leaving  my  home,  in  order  to  explore  what  is  outside  of  the 
six  cardinal  points,7  you  will  condemn  me.  I  began  travelling  in 
my  youth.  When  I  liad  grown  up,  I  did  not  care  for  the  ordinary 

1  Tlie  eight  principal  Taoiat  associates  of  Huai  iV'an  Tte、  one  of  which  waa 
Wei 化 

*  The  following  story  is  taken  from  Huai  Nan  Tse. 
， A  traveller  of  the  3rd  cent.  b.c. 

*  This  expression  can  mean  the  Gobi. 

s  The  "  Great  North  ，，  and  the  "  Dark  Gate  "  are  Taoist  fancy  names. 

*  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  name  Mongol  '穀. here.  The  last  character 
is  written 古 now.  The  Mongols  were  already  known  to  the  Chinese  under  their 
actual  uame  in  the  second  century  b.c,  when  they  were  living  in  the  north  of  China. 

7  To  wit  the  four  quarters,  above  and  below. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untnnhs. 


330 


duties  of  man,  but  managed  to  travel  about.  Of  the  four  poles 
the  "Greath  North"  is  the  only  one  which  I  have  not  yet  seen. 
Now  unexpectedly  I  find  you  here,  Sir.  Shall  we  not  become 
friends ?" 

The  stranger  burst  out  laughing  and  said,  "  Why,  you  are  a 
Chinaman.  You  ought  not  to  come  as  far  as  th\s.  Yet  sun  and 
moon  are  still  shining  liorc.  There  are  all  the  stars,  the  four 
seasons  alternate,  and  tlie  Yin  and  the  Yang  are  still  at  work.  Com- 
pared to  the  "  Nameless  Region  "  this  is  only  like  a  small  hill. 
I  travel  south  over  the  "  Weary  Waste,"  and  halt  north  in  tlie 
" Hidden  Village."  I  proceed  west  to  the  "  Obscure  Hamlet,"  and 
pass  oast  through  the  "  Place  of  Dimness."  There  is  no  earth 
beneath,  and  no  heaven  above.  Listening  one  does  not  hear,  and 
to  the  lookcr-on  tlie  objects  flit  away  from  siglit.  Beyond  that 
region  there  is  still  shape.  Wliere  that  oiids,  one  advances  ten 
million  Li  by  making  one  step.  I  could  not  yet  get  there.  You, 
Sir,  reached  only  tin's  place  in  your  travels,  hut  speak  of  exploring. 
Is  not  that  an  exaggeration?  But,  please,  remain.  I  have  to  meet 
Han  Man 1  on  the  ninth  heaven,2  and  cannot  stav  longer." ― The 
stranger  then  raised  his  arms,  gave  his  body  a  jerk,  and  off  he 
went  into  the  clouds. 

Lu  Ao  stared  after  him,  until  he  became  invisible.  His  heart 
was  full  of  endless  joy,  and  at  the  same  time  he  、vjuj  grieved,  as 
though  he  had  lost  somebody.  "  Compared  with  you,  my  master, 
said  he,  I  am  nothing  more  than  an  earth-worm  is  to  a  wild  goose. 
Crawling  the  whole  day, 【 do  not  advance  more  than  some  feet, 
but  myself  consider  it  far.    It  is  pitiable  indeed." ― 

Such  as  Lu  Ao  held  that  dragons  alone  have  no  wings,  and 
when  tliey  rise,  ride  on  the  clouds.  Had  Lu  Ao  said  that  tlie 
stranger  had  wings,  his  words  might  be  credible.  But  he  did  not 
speak  of  wings,  how  could  the  other  then  ascend  to  tlie  clouds? 

Those  creaturrs  which  witli  ability  rise  into  the  clouds,  do 
not  take  human  fiuxl  or  human  drink.  The  dragon's  food  is  difTcrcnt 
from  that  of  snakes,  hence  its  movements  are  not  the  same  as 
those  of  snakes.  One  hears  that  the  Taoists  drink  an  rlixir  made 
of  gold  ami  gems  and  eat  the  Ho、v«'rs  of  the  purple  boletus.  These 
extremely  fine  stufls  make  their  bodies  light,  so  that  they  become 
spirits  and  genii.  Tlie  stranger  ate  the  flesh  of  an  oyster.  Such 
is  the  food  of  ordinary  people,  by  no  means  fine,  or  rendering  tlie 

1  This  is  probably  the  name  of  a  genius. 

a  According  to  the  belioi'  of  tlie  Taoists  there  arc  nine  superposed  stages  or 
spheres  of  the  heavens. 

Digitized  by  Google 


Lan-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


body  light.  How  could  he  then  have  given  himself  a  jerk  and 
ascended  to  heaven? 

I  have  hoard  that  tliose  who  feed  on  air  do  not  take  solid 
food,  and  that  the  latter  do  not  eat  air.  The  above  mentioned 
st ranger  ate  something  substantial.  Since  he  did  not  live  on  air, 
he  could  not  be  so  light,  tliat  he  might  have  risen  on  bigb. 

May  be  that  Lu  Ao  studying  Too  and  trying  hard  to  become 
an  immortal,  travelled  to  the  Northern  Sea.  Having  left  ljuinan 
society,  and  gone  far  away,  he  felt  that  he  did  not  succeed 
in  acquiring  Too.  lie  was  ashamed  and  afraid,  lest  his  fellow- 
countrymen  should  criticize  him.  Knowing  that  things  would  cert- 
ainly turn  out  so,  that  every  body  would  reproach  hiui,  he  invented 
the  extravagant  stories.  He  said  that  he  met  with  a  strauger. 
The  meaning  of  the  whole  story  is  that  his  efforts  to  become  im- 
mortal were  not  successful,  aud  that  time  had  not  yet  come. 

In  the  case  of  Liu  An,  Prince  of  Iluai-nan,  who  suffered  death 
as  a  punishment  of  rebellion,  all  people  heard  of  it,  and  at  that 
time  saw  it,  and  yet  the  books  of  the  Literati  say  that  lie  obtained 
Too,  and  disappeared  us  a  gouiua,  and  that  his  cocks  and  dogs 
wcut  up  to  heaven  also.  We  cannot  be  surprised  tbeu  that  L"  Ao, 
who  alone  went  to  a  far-off  country,  leaving  no  trace,  should  speak 
obscure  and  mysterious  words.  His  case  is  similar  to  tliat  of  Hsiany 
Man  Tul  of  Vu-fan'1  in  Ho-tung.3 

Hsinug  Man  Tu  was  a  follower  of  Too  and  a  student  of  spirit- 
ism. He  abandoued  his  family,  and  went  away.  When  after  three 
years  absence  lu;  came  back,  liis  people  asked  him,  what  had  hap- 
pened to  him.  Ihiang  Man  Tu  replied  "  I  have  no  clear  recollection 
of  my  doparturo,  but  I  suddenly  found  myself  as  if  lying  dowu. 
Several  genii  appeared,  who  took  ine  up  to  licaven,  until  we  were 
at  some  tew  Li's  distance  from  the  moon.  I  saw  that  above  ami 
beneath  tlie  moon  all  was  dark,  so  that  I  could  not  distinguish 
East  and  West.  Where  we  stopped  near  the  moon,  it  was  bitter 
cold.  I  frit  hungry,  and  wished  to  eat,  、vlit'u  a  genius  gave  me 
a  cupful  of  morning- red  to  driuk.  After  having  taken  ono  cup,  oiu* 
does  not  feel  hunger  for  several  months.  I  do  not  know,  how  many 
years  or  months  I  stayed  there,  nor  what  fault  1  committed,  for  sud- 
denly I  found  myself  asleep  again,  and  brought  down  to  this  place." 


1  In  the  "  Water  Classic  " 水 輕 注 lUang  Man  Tu 
HMang  Niny  Tu 項 寧都. 

s  The  modern  lyu-chou-fu  in  Shansi. 

3  A  circuit  oouiprising  the  southern  part  of*  Shann. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untrutlis. 


H41 


The  Ho-tutig  people  gave  him  the  surname  of  "  Fallen  Angel." 
But  dealing  thoroughly  with  the  subject,  we  find  that  this  story 
is  impossible.  If  Ilskmy  Man  Tu  could  rise  to  heaven,  he  must 
have  become  a  genius.  How  could  he  return  after  three  years'  time? 
If  a  man  leaves  his  kindred,  and  ascends  to  heaven,  his  vital  fluid 
and  bis  body  must  have  undergone  a  change.  Now,  all  creatures 
that  have  been  metamorphosed,  do  not  return  to  their  previous 
state.  When  a  chrysalis  has  changed  into  a  cricket,  and  received 
its  wings,  it  cannot  be  transmuted  into  a  chrysalis  again.  All 
creatures  that  lly  up,  have  wings.  When  they  fly  up,  and  come 
down  again,  their  wings  are  still  there  as  before.  Had  Hsiang  Man 
IV s  body  had  win^,  his  tale  might  be  reliable,  but  since  it  had 
not,  his  talk  is  futile  and  not  more  trustworthy  than  La  Ao's. 

Perhaps  it  was  known  at  his  time  that  Hsiang  Man  Tu  was 
a  fervent  believer  in  Tao,  who  stealthily  left  his  home,  and  wandered 
about  in  distant  lands.  At  last,  when  he  achieved  nothing,  and 
felt  his  strength  exhausted,  an<l  his  hope  gone,  he  stealthily  re- 
turned home,  but  being  ashamed,  if  he  liad  nothing  to  say,  he 
told  tlie  story  of  Iiis  ascension  to  heaven,  intimating  thereby  that 
Tao  could  be  learned,  and  that  there  really  were  geuii,  and  that 
he  himself  was  degraded  for  some  fault,  after  having  readied  the 
goal,  first  rising  to  heaven,  and  then  coming  down  agaiu. 


The  books  of  the  Literati  contain  the  statement  that  the  king 
of  Ch'i  being  dangerously  ill,  a  messenger  was  sent  to  Sung  to  fetch 
WM  Chih.x  Wlien  he  arrived  and  saw  the  king's  sickness  he  said 
to  the  heir-apparent  :  44  The  king's  illness  can  certainly  be  cured, 
but  when  it  has  been,  the  king  is  sure  to  kill  me." 

The  lieir-apparent  inquired  what  for,  Win  Chih  replied,  "With- 
out anger  the  king's  illness  cannot  be  cured,  l>ut  when  the  king 
gets  angry,  my  death  is  certain." 

The  heir-apparent  bowed  liis  head,  and  entreated  him  saying, 
" Should  you  cure  the  king's  sickness,  myself  and  ray  mother  arc 
going  to  forcibly  restrain  tlie  kinjr  at  the  cost  of  our  lives.  Tlie 
king  will  certainly  please  my  motlier.  We  are  wishing  that  you, 
master,  shall  liave  no  trouble." 

Wen  Chih  gave  his  consent  and  said  that  he  was  prepared  to 
(lie.    The  king  with  hi»  eldest  son  fixed  a  time.   Thrice  the  phy- 

1  A  famous  doctor,  who  cannot  have  lived  later  than  the  4th  cent.  B.C.,  for 

he  w  mentioned  in  L<th  7V. 


igitized  by  Google 


H42 


Lan-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


sician  was  expected,  but  did  not  come  so,  that  the  king  of  Chit  was 
already  very  angry.  When  he  came  at  last,  he  did  not  put  off 
his  shoes,  but  walked  upon  the  bed  aud  tread  upon  the  slieets. 
He  asked  the  king  about  his  sickness,  but  the  king  was  so  furious, 
that  he  did  not  speak  with  him.  Then  he  said  something  whicli 
but  aggravated  the  king's  wrath.  The  king  abused  him,  and  rost' 
up,  aud  h\a  disease  was  gone.  He  was  so  enraged  and  so  little 
pleased,  tliat  he  wished  to  boil  WSn  Chih  alive.1  The  heir-apparent, 
and  tlie  queen  forthwith  interfered,  but  could  obtain  nothing.  Wen 
Chih  was  actually  boiled  alive  in  a  cauldron :  After  three  days'  and 
three  night's  cooking,  his  appearance  Iiad  not  yet  changed.  Win 
Chih  said,  "  If  one  really  is  anxious  to  kill  me,  why  docs  one  not 
put  on  the  lid  to  intercept  the  Yin  ami  the  Yang  fluids." 

The  king  liad  the  lid  put  on,  wliereupon  WVn  Chili  d"、d. 
HV/t  Chih  was  a  Taoist,  in  water  lie  was  not  drowned,  and  in  fire 
he  did  not  burn.2  Hence  lie  could  remain  three  days  and  three 
nights  in  the  kettle  without  changing  colour. 

This  ia  idle  talk.  W^n  Chili  was  boiled  tlirec  days  and  nights 
without  changing  colour.  If  then  only  in  consequeace  of  the  lid 
being  put  on  he  was  clioked  and  died,  this  proves  that  ho  was 
not  in  possession  of  Tao.  All  living  and  breathing  creatures  tlie, 
when  deprived  of  air.  When  they  are  dead  and  boiled,  they 
become  soft.  If  living  and  breathiug  creatures  arc  placed  in  vessels 
with  a  lid  on,  having  all  their  fissures  carefully  filled,  so  that  the 
air  cannot  circulate,  and  their  breath  cannot  pass,  they  (lie  instant- 
aneously. Thrown  into  a  kettle  with  boiling  water,  they  are  also 
cooked  soft.  Why?  Because  tlu-y  all  have  the  same  kind  of  body, 
the  same  breath,  are  eiulowed  by  heaveu  with  a  similar  nature, 
and  all  belong  to  one  class.  If  Wrn  Chih  did  not  breathe,  he  would 
have  boen  like  a  piece  of  metal  or  stone,  and  even  in  boiling  water 
not  be  cooked  soft.  Now  he  was  breathing,  therefore,  when  cooked, 
he  could  uot  but  die. 

If  Win  Chih  could  speak,  he  must  have  given  sounds,  which 
require  breathing.  Breathing  is  closely  connected  with  the  vital 
force,  whioh  resides  in  bones  and  flesh.  Beings  of  bones  and  flesh 
being  cooked,  die.    To  deny  that  is  the  first  untruth. 

Provided  that  WSn  ChUi  could  be  cooked  without  dying,  he 
was  a  perfect  Taoist,  similar  to  metal  or  stone.  To  metal  or  stouc 
it  makes  no  difference,  wbether  a  lid  be  put  on,  or  not.  There- 


A  parallel  passage  of  this  story  occurs  in  the  LO-shih-^h'un-ch'iu. 
That  is  what  the  Taoist*  say  of  themselves. 


Taoiat  Untruths. 


fore,  to  say  that  Whi  Chili  died,  when  the  lid  was  put  on,  is  a 
second  untruth. 

Put  a  man  iuto  cold  water,  which  is  not  liot  like  boiling 
water,  and  he  will  die  for  want  of  breath  after  a  short  interval, 
ins  nose  and  mouth  beiug  shut  out  from  the  outer  air.  Submerged 
in  cold  water,  a  man  cannot  remain  alive,  how  mucli  less  in  bub- 
bling, boiling  water,  in  the  midst  of  a  violent  fire?  To  say  that 
Win  Chili  survived  in  the  boiling  water  is  a  third  untruth. 

When  a  man  is  submerged  in  water,  so  that  liis  mouth  is  not 
visible  outside,  the  sound  of  what  he  says  is  inaudible.  When 
Wen  CliUi  was  cooked,  his  body  was  certainly  submerged  in  the 
kettle,  and  his  mouth  invisible.  Under  those  circumstances  one 
could  not  hear,  wliat  he  uaid.  That  Win  ChUi  should  have  spoken 
is  the  fourth  untruth. 

Hail  a  man  who  after  three  days'  and  three  nights'  cooking 
died,  not  changed  colour,  even  ignorant  people  would  have  been 
amused.  If  the  king  of  (7//  was  not  surprised,  the  heir-apparent  and 
his  ministers  should  have  noticed  this  wonderful  fact.  In  their 
astonishment  at  Wen  L'hih  they  would  liavo  prayed  tliat  lie  be  taken 
out,  granted  liigh  honours,  and  be  venerated  as  a  master,  I'rom 
whom  one  might  learn  more  about  Tao.  Now  three  clays  and  three 
nights  are  mentioned,  but  nothing  is  said  about  the  officials  asking 
for  his  release.    That  is  the  fifth  untruth. 

At  that  time  it  was  perhaps  kuowu  that  Win  Chih  was  actually 
cooked,  and  that  his  death  was  caused  l)y  it.  People  noticing 
that  he  was  a  Taoist,  invented  the  story  that  be  lived  a  subtle 
life,  and  did  not  (lit',  just  as  Huony  Ti  really  died,  whereas  the 
reports  say  tliat  lie  rose  to  heaveu,  and  as  the  prince  "f  Huai-nan 
suffered  tlie  punishment  of  rebellion,  whilst  the  books  say  that  he 
entered  a  new  life.  Tliere  are  those  who  like  to  spread  false 
reports.  Hence  the  story  of  Wen  Chih  has  been  propagated  until  now. 

There  are  no  instances  of  any  one  having  obtained  Tao,  but 
there  have  been  very  long-lived  persons.  People  remarking  that 
those  persons,  while  studying  Tao  and  the  art  of  immortality,  be- 
come ovt'r  a  hundred  years  old  without  <lyinjr,  call  them  immortals, 
as  the  following  example  will  show. 

At  the  time  of  Han  Wu  Ti 1  there  lived  a  certain  Li  Shoo  Chn", 
who  pre  tended  tliat  by  sacri  firing  to  tl"、  "  Ileartli  "  and  abstaining 
from  eating  grain  lie  could  ward  oil'  old  age.  He  saw  tlie  emperor, 
who  conferred  high  honours  upon  him.    Li  Shao  f'fiil"  kept  his  age 

1  140-85  B.f. 


Digitized  by  Google  i 


HI4 


Lun-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


and  the  place  where  he  was  born  and  had  grown  up  secret,  always 
sayiug  that  be  was  seventy  old,  and  could  effect  that  things  did 
not  grow  old.  On  his  journeys  he  visited  all  tlie  princes  around, 
and  was  not  married.  On  hearing  that  be  could  manage  that  thing!* 
did  not  age,  people  presented  liim  with  much  richer  gifts  than  tli^y 
would  otherwise  have  done.  He  had  always  money,  gold,  dresses, 
and  food  in  abundance.  As  people  believed  that  he  did  not  do 
any  business,  and  was  yet  richly  provided  with  everything,  and 
as  nobody  kuew,  what  sort  of  a  mau  he  really  was,  there  was  a 
general  competition  in  offering  him  services. 

Li  Sltao  Chan  knew  some  clever  mantEuvrea  and  some  fine 
tricks,  whicli  did  not  fail  to  produce  a  wonderful  effect.  He  used 
to  feast  with  the  Marquis  of  Wu-an.1  In  the  hall  there  waa  a  man 
of  over  90  years.  Li  Shoo  Chan  indicated  to  him  the  places  which 
his  grand-father  frequented,  when  shooting.  The  old  man  knew 
tbem,  having  visited  them  as  a  child  with  his  father.  The  whole 
audience  was  bewildered. 

When  Li  Shoo  Chiln  saw  the  emperor,  the  emperor  had  an 
old  bronze  vase,  about  wliich  he  asked  him.  Li  Shoo  Chnn  replied 
that  in  the  15th  year2  of  the  reign  of  Duke  Huan  of  Ch'P  it  was 
placed  in  the  Po-ch  in  hall.  The  inscription  was  examined,  and  it 
was  found  out  that  it  was  indeed  a  vessel  of  Duke  Huan  of  Ch  i. 
The  whole  Court  was  startled,  and  thought  that  Li  Shoo  Chun  was 
several  hundred  years  old.4   After  a  long  time  he  died  of  sickness. 

Those  who  uow-a-days  are  credited  with  the  possession  of 
T(u>  are  men  like  LA  Shoo  Chiln.  lie  died  amongst  men.  His  body 
was  seen,  and  one  knew,  therefore,  that  his  nature  bad  been  lon- 
gevous. Had  he  dwelt  in  mouutaiti-forests  or  gone  into  deserts, 
leaving  no  trace  behind  hitn,  he  would  have  died  a  solitary  death 
of  sieltness  amidst  high  rocks.  His  corpse  would  liave  been  food 
for  tigers,  wolves,  and  foxes,  but  the  world  would  again  have  be- 
lieved hira  to  have  disappeared  as  a  real  immortal. 

The  ordinary  students  of  Too  have  not  Li  Shoo  Chiln' s  ace. 
Before  reaching  a  hundred  years  tliey  (lie  like  all  the  others.  Yet 
uncultured  and  ignorant  people  still  hold  that  they  are  separated 
from  their  bodies,  and  vanish,  and  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they 
do  not  die. 

1  A  district  in  ITonan.    The  name  of  the  Marquis  was  T'u-n  Fen. 
a  The  Shih-chi  says  the  t«nth  year. 

， Duke  Huan  of  Ch'i  reigned  from  683-641  b.c.  The  15th  year  of  his  reign 
was  669. 

4  Tliis  story  of  Li  Shao  Chun  is  quoted  from  the  Shi-chi  ch^p.  28,  p.  21. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untruths. 


345 


What  is  understood  by  separation  from  the  body?  Does  it 
mean  that  the  body  dies,  and  the  spirit  disappears?  Or  that  the 
body  does  not  die,  but  drops  its  coil?  If  one  says  that  the  body 
dies,  and  the  spirit  is  lost,  there  is  no  difference  from  death,  and 
every  one  is  a  genius.  And  if  one  believes  that  the  body  does  not 
die,  but  throws  off  its  coil,  oue  must  admit  that  the  bones  and 
the  flesh  of  all  the  deceased  Taoists  are  intact  and  in  no  wise 
different  from  the  corpses  of  ordinary  mortals. 

When  the  cricket  leaves  its  chrysalis,  the  tortoise  drops  its 
shell,  the  snake  its  skin,  and  the  sta^  its  horns,  in  short,  when 
the  horned  and  skinned  animals  lose  their  outward  cover,  retaining 
only  their  flesh  and  bones,  one  might  speak  of  the  separation  from 
the  body.  But  even  if  the  body  of  a  dead  Taoist  were  similar  to 
a  chrysalis,  one  could  not  use  this  expression,  because,  when  the 
cricket  leaves  the  chrysalis,  it  cannot  be  considered  as  a  spirit  with 
regard  to  the  chrysalis.  Now  to  call  it  a  separation  from  the  body, 
when  there  is  not  even  a  similarity  with  the  chrysalis,  would  again 
be  an  unfounded  assertion  missing:  the  truth. 

The  Grand  Annalist  was  a  contemporary  of  Li  Shao  Chfln. 
Although  he  was  not  amongst  those  who  came  near  to  Li  Shao 
ChQn's  body,  when  he  had  expired,  lie  was  in  a  position  to  learn 
the  truth.  If  he  really  did  not  die,  but  only  parted  with  his  body, 
the  Grand  Annalist  ought  to  have  put  it  on  record,  and  would  not 
have  given  the  place  of  his  death. 

The  reference  to  the  youth  of  the  nonagenarian  in  the  court 
would  prove  Li  Shao  CJulns  age.  Perhaps  he  was  fourteen  or  fif- 
teen years  old,  when  the  old  man  accompanied  his  grandfather  as 
a  boy.  Why  should  Li  Shao  Chiln  not  know  this,  if  he  lived 
200  years?1 

Wu  It's  time  is  very  far  from  Duke  Huan,  when  the  bronze 
vase  was  cast,  and  Li  Shao  ChUn  cannot  have  seen  it.  Perhaps 
he  heard  once  that  in  tlie  palace  there  was  an  old  vessel,  or  he 
examined  the  inscription  beforehand  to  speak  upon  it,  so  that  lie 
was  well-informed,  when  he  saw  it  again.  When  our  amateurs  of 
to-day  see  an  old  sword  or  an  antique  (； rooked  blade,  they  gener- 
ally know  where  to  place  it.  Docs  that  imply  that  they  saw,  how 
it  was  wrought? 

1  Why  200  years?  Li  Shao  Chun  would  have  known  the  nonagenarian's 
grandfather,  if  he  was  about  ninety  years  old  himself. 
' The  interval  is  upwards  of  500  years. 


346 


Luu  -  Hong  ：  ('.  Physical. 


Tung  Fang  So  is  said  to  have  also  been  possessed  of  Too.  His 
name  was  Chiny  his  style  Man  Ch' ien、  but  he  changed  his  names 
and  for  a  time  took  office  with  the  Han  dynasty.  Outwardly  lie 
was  considered  an  official,  but  inwardly  he  passed  to  another 
existence. 

This  is  wrong  too.  Tung  Fang  So  lived  together  with  Li 
Shoo  ChiXn  under  the  reign  of  Wu  Ti,  and  must  have  been  known 
to  the  Grand  Annalist.  Li  Shao  Chiln  taught  Too  and  a  method 
to  keep  off  old  age  by  means  of  sacrificing  to  the  "  Hearth."  He 
determined  the  period  of  a  tripod  cast  under  Duke  Ihian  of  (Jh  ；, 
and  knew  the-  places  frequented,  when  bunting,  by  the  graud father 
of  a  nonagenarian,  and  yet  he  did  not  really  attain  to  Too.  He 
was  only  a  loug-lived  man,  wlio  died  late.  Moreover,  Tung  Fattg 
So  was  not  as  successful  as  Li  S/iao  (:hn"  id  magical  arts,  where- 
fore then  was  he  credited  with  the  possession  of  Tao?  Under  Wu 
Ti  there  were  the  Taoists  Wen  Ck  ^ng  and  Wu  Li  and  others  of  tlie 
same  type,  who  went  on  sea  in  search  of  the  genii  and  to  find  the 
physic  of  immortality.  Because  they  evidently  knew  the  Taoist 
arts,  they  were  trusted  by  the  Emperor.  Tung  Fang  So  undertook 
no  mission  on  sea,  nor  did  be  do  anything  miraculous.  If  lie  had 
done,  he  would  only  liave  been  a  mail  like  Li  Shoo  ChOn  or  on  a 
level  with  Win  (  King  and  Wu  Li.  Nevertheless  he  had  the  chance 
to  be  credited  with  tlie  possession  of  Tao.  He  again  resembled 
Li  S/tao  Chiln,  insomuch  as  hv  made  a  secret  of  liis  birth  place, 
and  the  courtiers  did  not  know  his  origin.  He  exaggerated  his 
age.  People  finding  that  he  looked  rather  strong  and  young  and 
was  of  phlegmatic  temper,  tliat  lie  did  not  care  much  for  his  office, 
but  was  well  vei-sed  in  divination,  guessing,  and  other  interesting 
plays,  called  him  then-fore  a  man  possessed  of  Tao. 


There  is  a  belief  that  by  the  doctrine  of  Lao  Tie  one  can 
transcend  into  another  existence.  Through  (piietism  and  dispassion- 
ateness one  nourishes  the  vital  force,  and  cherishes  the  spirit.  The 
length  of  life  is  based  on  the  animal  spirits.  As  long  as  they  are 
unimpaired,  life  gru's  on,  and  there  is  no  death.  Jmo  Tse  acted 
upon  this  principle.  Having  done  so  for  over  a  hundred  years,  he 
passed  into  anotlnT  existence,  and  became  a  true  Taoist  sage. 

Who  can  be  inoro  quiet  and  have  less  desires  than  birds  and 
animals?  But  birds  and  animals  likewise  age  and  die.  However, 
we  will  uot  speak  of  birds  ami  animals,  the  passions  of  which  are 


ized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untruths. 


347 


similar  to  the  human.  But  which  are  the  passions  of  plants  and 
shrubs,  that  they  arc  horn  in  spring,  and  die  in  autumn?  They 
are  tlis{>;issionatc,  and  their  lives  do  uot  extend  further  than  oik' 
year.  Men  an*  full  of  passions  and  desires,  and  yet  tht'y  can  be- 
come a  liuiulred  years  old.  Thus  the  dispassionate  die  prematurely, 
and  the  passionat**  live  long.  Hence  Lao  Tse's  theory  to  prolong 
life  and  enter  a  new  existence  by  moans  of  quietism  aud  absence 
of  desires  is  wrong. 

Lao  Tse  was  like  Li  Sliao  Chiin.  He  practised  his  theory  of 
quietism,  and  his  life  happened  to  be  long  of  itself.  But  people 
seeing  this,  arid  hearing  of  his  quietism,  thought  that  by  his  art 
he  passed  into  another  existcnoe. 

The  idea  prevails  tliat  those  who  abstaiu  from  eating  grain, 
are  men  well  versed  in  the  art  of  Too.  They  say  e.  g.  that  Wang 
Tse  Cli  icut 1  and  the  like,  because  they  (lid  not  touch  grain,  and 
lived  on  different  food  than  ordinary  people,  had  not  the  same 
length  of  life  as  ordinary  jx'ople,  in  so  far  as  having  passed  a 
hundred  years,  they  transcended  into  another  state  of  being,  and  be- 
came immortals. 

That  is  another  mistake.  Eating  and  drinking  are  natural 
impulses,  with  which  we.  are  endowed  at  birth.  Hence  the  upper 
part  of  the  hodv  has  a  mouth  atul  tcetli,  tlie  inferior  part  orifices. 
Witli  the  moutli  and  teeth  one  chews  and  eats,  the  orifices  are  for 
the  discharge.  Keeping  in  ac<'ord  with  one's  nature,  one  follows 
the  law  of  lieaveu,  going  against  it,  one  violates  one's  natural  pro- 
pensities, and  neglects  one  s  natural  spirit  before  heaven.  How  can 
one  obtain  long  life  in  tins  way? 

If  Wang  Cli ian  had  got  no  mouth,  teetli,  or  orifices  at 
birth,  liis  nature  would  have  been  diireront  from  that  of  others. 
Even  then  one  <,<)uld  hardly  speak  of  long  life.  Now,  the  body 
is  the  same,  ouly  the  deeds  being  different.  To  say  that  in  this 
way  one  can  transcend  into  another  existence  is  not  warranted  by 
human  nature. 

For  a  man  not  to  eat  is  like  not  clothing  the  body.  Clothes 
keep  tlie  skin  warm,  and  food  fills  the  stomach.  With  a  warm 
epidermis  and  a  well- filled  belly  the  animal  spirits  are  bright  and 
exalted.  If  one  is  hungry,  and  has  nothing  to  eat,  or  feels  cold, 
and  has  nothing  to  warm  one's  self,  one  may  freeze  or  starve  to 
death.    How  can  frozen  and  starved  people  live  longer  than  others? 

1  A  magician  of  the  Hth  cent.  b.c,  son  of  King  Ling  of  the  Chou  dynasty. 
He  is  reported  to  have  been  seen  riding  on  a  white  crane  throagh  the  air  as  an 
iujuiortal. 


gitized  by  Google 


34S 


Ltiii-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 


Moreover,  during  his  life  mau  draws  his  vital  forco  from  food, 
just  as  plants  and  trees  do  from  earth.  Pull  out  the  roots  of  a 
plant  or  a  tree,  and  separate  them  from  tlie  soil,  and  the  plant 
will  wither,  and  soon  ilie.  Shut  a  man's  mouth,  so  that  he  cannot 
eat,  and  he  will  starve,  but  not  be  long-lived. 


The  Taoists  exalting  each  other's  power  assert  that  the  "  p»>re 
man "  eats  the  fluid,  that  the  fluid  is  his  food.  Wherefore  the 
books  9ay  that  the  fluid-eaters  live  long,  and  do  not  die,  that, 
although  they  do  not  fe^d  on  cereals,  they  become  fat  and  strong 
by  the  fluid. 

Tliis  too  is  erroneous.  What  kind  of  fluid  is  understood  by 
fluid?  If  the  fluid  of  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  be  meant,  tliis  fluid 
cannot  satiate  people.  Tliey  may  inhale  this  fluid,  so  that  it  fills 
their  belly  and  bowels,  yet  they  cannot  feel  satiated.  If  the  fluid 
inherent  iu  medicine  be  meant,  man  may  use  arid  eat  a  case  full  of 
dry  drugs,  or  swallow  some  ten  pills.  But  the  effects  of  medicine 
are  very  strong.  They  cause  great  pain  in  the  chest,  but  cannot 
iVed  a  man.  The  meaning  must  certainly  be  that  the  fluid-eaters 
breathe,  inhaling  and  exhaling,  emitting  the  old  air  and  taking  in 
the  new.  Of  old,  P  ^ng  Tsu 1  used  to  practise  this.  Nevertheless 
he  could  not  live  indefinitely,  but  died  of  sickness. 


Many  Taoists  liold  that  by  regulating  one's  breath  one  can 
nourish  chip's  nature,  pass  into  another  state  of  bcin^,  and  become 
immortal.  Their  idea  is  that,  if  tlie  blood  vessels  in  the  body  be 
not  always  in  motion,  expanding  and  contracting,  an  obstruction 
fiisucs.  There  beitig  no  free  passage,  constipation  is  the  conse- 
<|uenee,  which  causes  sickness  and  dfatli. 

This  is  likewise  without  any  foundation.  Man's  body  is  like 
that  of  plants  and  trees.  Plants  and  trees  grow  ing  on  the  summit* 
of  high  mountains,  wIhtc  tliey  an、  exposed  to  tlie  squalls  of  wind, 
are  moved  day  ami  ni^lit,  but  do  tliey  surpass  those  that  are 
hidden  iu  mountain  valleys  and  sheltered  from  wind? 

1  The  Chinese  MtthvsaUh,  who  is  believed  to  have  lived  over  800  years, 
and  to  have  been  a  great  grandson  of  the  legendary  Emperor  Chuan  11m  2514  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Taoist  Untrutli9. 


:U9 


When  plants  and  trees,  while  growing,  are  violently  shaken, 
they  are  injured,  and  pine  away.  Why  then  should  man  by 
drawing  his  breath  and  moving  his  body  gain  a  long  life  and  not 
die?  The  blood  arteries  traverse  the  body,  as  streams  and  rivers 
flow  through  the  land.  While  thus  flowing,  the  latter  lose  their 
limpidity,  and  become  turbid.  When  the  blood  is  moved,  it  be- 
comes agitated  also,  wliich  causes  uneasiness.  Uneasiness  is  like 
the  hardships  man  has  to  endure  without  remedy.  How  can  that 
be  conducive  to  a  long  life? 

The  Taoists  sometimes  use  medicines  with  a  view  to  rendering 
their  bodies  more  supple  and  their  vital  force  stronger,  hoping 
thus  to  prolong  their  years  and  to  enter  a  new  existence. 

This  is  a  deception  likewise.  There  are  many  examples  that 
by  the  use  of  medicines  the  body  grew  ruore  supple,  and  tlie  vital 
Ibrce  stronger,  but  the  world  affords  no  instance  of  t\w  prolongation 
of  life  and  a  new  existence  following. 

The  different  physics  cure  all  sorts  of  diseases.  When  they 
have  been  cured,  tlie  vital  force  is  restored,  and  then  the  body 
becomes  supple  again.  According  to  man's  original  nature  his  body 
is  supple  of  itself,  and  his  vital  force  lasts  long  of  its  own  accord. 
But  by  exposure  to  wind  and  wetness  he  falls  a  victim  to  hundreds 
of  diseases,  whence  liis  body  l)ecomes  heavy  and  stiff,  and  his  force 
is  weakened.  By  taking  an  efficacious  remedy  he  restores  his  body 
and  the  vital  force.  This  force  is  not  small  at  the  outset,  or  the 
body  heavy,  and  it  is  not  by  medicine  that  the  force  lasts  long, 
or  the  body  grows  supple  and  light.  When  first  received, 1  they 
already  possess  those  qualities  spontaneously.  Therefore,  wlien  by 
medicines  the  various  diseases  are  dispelled,  the  body  made  supple, 
and  the  vital  force  prolonged,  tliey  merely  return  to  their  original 
state,  but  it  is  impossible  to  add  to  the  number  of  y«*ars,  let  alone 
the  transition  into  another  existence. 

Of  all  the  beings  with  blood  in  their  veins  there  art'  none 
but  are  born,  and  of  those  endowed  with  life  there  are  none  but 
die.  From  the  fact  that  they  were  bom,  one  knows  that  they 
must  die.  Heaven  and  Earth  were  not  bom,  tlierefore  they  do 
not  die.  The  Yin  and  the  Yang  were  not  born,  therefore  tliey  do 
not  die.  Death  is  the  correlate  of  birth,  and  birth  the  counter- 
part of  death.  That  wliich  has  a  beginning,  must  have  an  end, 
and  that  wliich  has  an  end,  must  necessarily  have  had  a  begin- 


1   Viz.  received  by  man  at  his  birth,  when  Heaven  endows  him  with  a  body 
and  the  vital  fluid. 


Digitized  by  Google 


350 


I.un-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


nlng.  Only  what  is  without  beginning  or  end,  lives  for  ever  and 
never  dies.1 

Human  life  is  like  water.  Water  frozen  gives  ice,  and  the 
vital  force  concentrated  forms  the  human  being.  Ice  lasts  one 
winter,  then  it  melts,  man  lives  a  hundred  years,  than  he  dies. 
Bid  a  man  not  to  die,  can  you  bid  ice  not  to  melt?  All  those 
who  study  the  art  of  immortality  and  trust  that  there  are  means, 
by  which  one  iloos  not  die,  must  fail  as  sure,  as  one  cannot  cause 
ice  never  to  melt. 

1  This  the  Taoists  say  of  tlieir  fundamental  principle.  "  Too  is  without 
begiuning,  without  end,''  says  Chuang  Tst  chap.  17,  p.  13,  and  thus  the  Taoists 
which  have  become  one  willi  Too,  are  immortal. 


Digitized  by  VjO 


On  Dragons. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 
On  Dragons  (Lung-/isu). 

When  in  midsummer  during  a  thunder-storm  lightning  strikes 
a  tree  or  demolishes  a  house,  it  is  a  common  saying  that  Heaven 
fetches  the  dragon,  which  is  believed  to  hide  in  tlie  tree,  or  to  be 
concealed  in  tlie  house.  The  lightning  striking  th«  tree,  or  demol- 
ishing the  house,  the  dragon  appears  outsidi*.  ()u  its  appearance, 
it  is  seized  upon  by  the  tliunder,  and  carried  up  to  Heaven.  The 
unintelligent  and  the  learued,  tlie  virtuous  and  tlie  wicked  are  all 
agreed  upon  this,  but  trying  to  get  at  the  truth,  we  find  that  it 
is  idle  talk. 

Why  should  Heaven  fetch  the  dragon?  Provided  that  the 
dragon  be  a  spirit  and  Heaven's  envoy,  as  a  virtuous  minister  is 
the  deputy  of  his  sovereign,  then  it  ought  to  report  itself  at  a 
fixed  time,  and  would  not  have  to  be  fetched.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  dragon  sneaks  away,  and  does  not  come  back,  it  does 
not  behave  like  a  spirit,  and  would  be  of  no  use  to  Heaven. 

According  to  the  dragon's  nature  its  real  abode  is  Heaven. 
Being  there  it  certainly  must  have  offspring.  There  would  be  no 
reason,  why  it  should  be  on  earth  again.  If  there  are  rising  and 
descending  dragons,  the  latter  class  might  bear  its  offspring  on  earth, 
and  Heaven  fetch  it,  when  grown  up.  People  call  a  tempest  an 
expression  of  Heaven's  anger,  but  in  fe telling  the  scion  of  a  dragon 
it  canuot  be  angry. 

Further  the  dragon  generally  lives  in  ponds,  not  in  trees  or 
houses.  Whence  do  we  know  that?  Shu  Hiiang's 1  mother  said: 
" In  the  depths  of  mouutaina  and  in  vast  marshes  dragons  aud 
snakes  really  grtnv."3  And  in  books  we  read,  "  Where  the 
mountains  are  highest,  the  rain  clouds  rise,  aud  where  the  water 
is  deepest,  tlie  different  species  of  dragons  are  born."3  The  annals 

1  A  minister  in  Chm,  6th  cent.  b.c. 

8  Quoted  from  the  T«o^chimn,  Duke  fhiang  21st  year  {Ltgge,  Cl<wdc<  Vol.  V, 
Pt.  II,  p.  491).  The  mother  of  Shu  llnang  spoko  these  words  in  a  figurative  sense, 
with  reference  to  Shu  lhiting'.、  half-brother,  and  his  beautiful  mother,  a  concubine 
of  her  husband.    Cf.  p.  302. 

s  A  parallel  passage,  worded  a  little  diirereiitly,  occura  in  HaAn  Tw. 


Digitized  by  Google 


352 


Lun-Hfng:  C.  Physical. 


go  on  to  say  that,  when  Yu  crossed  the  Yanglse,  a  yellow  dragon 
carried  his  boat  on  its  back,1  and  that,  when  Ching  Tse  Fei  went 
over  the  Huai,  two  dragons  swam  round  his  Bhip.  Near  the 
Eastern  Sea2  there  lived  Lu  Chin  If  sin,  a  bold  and  strong  man. 
When  he  once  passed  the  Spirit  Pool,  he  orderod  his  charioteer 
to  givo:  his  horse  to  driiik  there,  but  when  it  drank,  it  sank  down. 
Lu  Cliiu  Hsin  got  angry,  drew  his  sword,  and  went  into  the  pool 
in  pursuit  of  his  liorse.  He  then  beheld  two  dragons  just  in  the 
act  of  devouring  his  horse.  S\vor«l  iu  hand,  he  slew  the  two  dragons.3 
Heuce  it  is  evident  that  the  dragons  called  "  chiao  " 4  and  the  others 
always  live  in  the  water  of  pools,  and  not  on  trees  or  in  houses. 

Living  in  deep  water  dragons  belong  to  the  same  category 
as  fish  and  reptiles.  Why  should  tish  and  reptiles  ascend  to 
Heaven,  and  what  could  Heaven  use  the  dragon  for,  if  it  fetched 
it  up?  If  the  Spirit  of  [leaven  should  ride  on  the  clragou,  a  spirit 
is  something  dillusc  and  incorporeal.  Entering  and  depart iug,  it 
needs  no  aperture,  neither  would  it  require  a  dragon  to  ride  upon. 
Should  the  genii  mount  the  dragon,  then  Heaven  would  fetch  it 
for  their  sake.  But  the  genii  are  imbued  with  the  fluid  of  Heaven, 
and  their  bodies  are  so  light,  that  they  can  fly  up  like  wild  geese. 
Therefore,  why  should  they  ride  upon  dragons? 

People  in  general  say  that  Huang  Ti  ascended  to  Heaven  on 
a  dragon.  This  statement  is  as  inane  as  the  other,  made  now-a- 
days,  that  Heaven  fetches  the  dragon.  If  the  dragon  ia  said  to 
rise  to  Heaven,  it  implies  a  dragon  spirit,  because  only  a  spirit  can 
soar  on  high,  this  being  in  fact  a  characteristic  feature  of  spirite. 

Among  the  creatures  produced  by  Heaven  and  Earth  man 
being  the  noblrst,  the  dragon  must  be  inferior.  If  the  noblest  are 
not  spirits,  can  the  inferior  be  so?  Let  us  suppose  that  the  nature 
of  dragons  be  such,  that  some  of  tliem  are  spirits,  the  others  not, 
and  that  the  spirits  rise  to  Heaven,  while  those  that  are  not  spirits, 
cannot :  are  turtles  and  snakes  likewise  partly  spirits  and  partly  not, 
and  can  the  turtle  spirits  and  the  snake  spirits  ascend  to  Heaven? 

Moreover,  what  essence  is  the  dragon  endowed  with,  that  it 
should  alone  be  a  spirit?  Ileaven  has  the  four  constellations  of 
the  Blue  Dragon,  the  White  Tiger,  tlie  Scarlet  Bird,  and  the  Black 

1  This  fact  is  recorded  in  the  Lu  Shih  c/t'un-ch'iu  and  in  Huai  Aon  Tm  VII, 
Hv.   Vid.  also  Lun-yng  Bk.  V,  p.  4  {Yi-hm). 
a  The  Yellow  Sea,  east  of  China. 

*  This  story  is  narrated  in  the  Ilan-ahih-wai-chuan  150  b.c.  and  the  Pohtu- 
chih,  where  the  hero  is  called  Taai  ( 'hiu  Httin  however. 

* 蛟' 


Digitized  by  doo 


On  Dragons.  353 

Tortoise.  Earth  also  has  dragons,  tigers,  scarlet  birds,  and  turtles. 
The  essence  of  the  four  constellations  pouring  down,  produces  those 
four  animals.  The  tiger,  the  scarlet  bird,  and  the  turtle  not  being 
spirits,  wherefore  should  the  dragon  alone  be  a  spirit? 

Man  ranks  first  among  the  naked  creatures,  as  the  dragon  is 
the  foremost  of  the  scaly  animals.  Both  take  the  first  place  among 
their  kindred.  If  the  dragon  ia  believed  to  asceud  to  Heaven,  does 
man  rise  to  Heaveu  likewise?  If  under  the  above  respect  the  dragon 
is  on  the  same  level  with  man,  but  alone  credited  with  the  faculty 
of  ascending  to  Heaven,  the  dragon  must  be  supposed  to  be  a  spirit. 

The  world  also  says  that  the  sages  being  spirits,  have  the 
gift  of  prophecy,  as  they  say  that  the  dragon  spirits  are  able  to 
soar  to  Heaven.  The  divination  of  the  sages  thus  being  accounted 
for,  it  is  but  natural  that  the  special  talent  of  the  dragon  should 
be  found  in  its  power  to  rise  to  Heaven. 

That  whicli  amidst  Heaven  and  Earth  is  vague  and  un- 
substantial as  the  vapours  of  cold  and  heat,  wind  and  rain,  has  the 
nature  of  a  spirit.  Now  the  dragon  has  a  body,  haviug  a  body, 
it  moves  about,  moving  about,  it  eats,  anil  eating,  it  has  the  nature 
of  other  creatures.  According  to  the  organisation  of  Heaven  and 
Earth  whatever  possesses  a  body,  moves  about,  and  eats,  canuot 
be  a  spirit.    How  so? 

The  dragon  has  a  body.  One  finds  in  books  the  statement, 
that  out  of  the  three  hundred  scaly  auimals  the  dragou  is  the  first. 
Being  the  first  of  the  scaly  animals,  liow  can  it  be  without  a  iJody  ? 

Confucius  said  that  the  dragon  fed  in  limpid  places,  and  lived 
there,  that  the  tortoise  fed  in  limpid  places,  and  lived  in  the  mud, 
and  that  tlie  fish  fed  in  the  mud,  and  lived  iu  clear  water.  He 
did  not  attain  to  the  dragon  himself,  but  was  neither  equal  to 
the  fisli,  he  was  only  to  be  compared  t<»  the  tortoise,  which  takes 
tbe  middle  rank. 

The  Shan-hai-king  1  relates  that  beyond  the  four  seas  there  are 
men  riding  on  dragon  snakes.  As  a  rule,  dragons  arc  pictorially 
represented  with  a  horse's  head  and  a  snake's  tail.  Hence  they 
must  be  hybrids  between  the  liorse  and  the  snake. 

Sh^n  Tse'2  informs  us  that  the  flying  dragons  mount  the  clouds, 
aud  that  tlie  soaring  serpents  ramble  through  the  fog.  When  the 
clouds  disperse,  and  the  rain  ceases,  they  are  like  earthworms  and  ants. 

1  The  "  Mountain  and  Sea  Classic,"  the  oldest  geographical  work  of  the  4th 
or  the  3rd  cent  b.c. 

9  The  Taoist  philosopher  Sht'n  Too  of  the  5th  cent  b.c,  of  whose  works 
only  fragments  are  left. 

LunH«n8.  2S 


Digitized  by  Google 


354 


Lan-Hpng:  C.  Physical. 


Han  Fei  Tse 1  teaches  that  the  dragon  is  a  reptile,  which  obeys 
a  call,  and  allowes  itself  to  be  patted  and  mounted.  But  under 
its  throat  it  has  a  protruding  scale  over  a  foot  long.  If  a  man  knocks 
against  it,  the  dragon  always  kills  hiin. 

In  short,  the  dragon  is  compared  with  earthworms  and  ants,  and 
it  is  further  said  to  be  a  reptile,  which  can  be  patted  and  mounted. 
It  must  therefore  have  something  in  common  with  snakes  and  horses. 

It  is  reported  that  when  Chou2  used  ivory  chopsticks,3  Chi  Tse* 
burst  into  teare.  He  wept,  t-ominiseratiug  his  excesses.  Tlierc  being 
ivory  chopsticks,  there  must  liave  been  jade  cups  also.  These  jade 
cups  and  ivory  chopsticks  were  certainly  used  to  hold  and  to  seize 
dragon  liver  and  unborn  leopard.5  Dragon  liver  was  eatable,  but 
a  dragon  hard  to  be  found.  This  being  the  case,  the  emperor  would 
frown  upon  his  subordinates.  That  would  bring  them  into  distress, 
therefore  Chi  Taes  syinpatliy. 

If  the  dragou  were  a  spirit,  its  body  could  not  be  killed,  ami 
its  liver  not  be  eaten.  The  livers  and  the  unborn  young  of  birds 
and  animals  aTe  not  the  same.  Dragon  liver  and  unborn  leopard 
being  specially  mt'iitioned,  man  must  have  oaten  thciu,  and  thereby 
learned  to  appreciate  their  excellent  taste. 

During  the  epoch  of  Spring  and  Autumn,"  a  dragon  appeared 
in  the  outskirts  of  Chiang.7  Viscount  Hsien  of  Wei6  interrogated 
T'sai  M(' n  saying,  "  I  heard  say  that  of  all  creatures  noue  is  as 
intelligent  as  the  dragon,  wliich  therefore  cannot  be  caught  alive. 
Is  it  true  wliat  they  .say  about  its  cleverness?  "  The  other  replied, 
" Those  that  say  so,  really  do  not  know.  As  a  fact,  tlie  dragou 
is  not  intelligent.  Of  old,  dragons  wen*  doinosticated,  therefore  the 
empire  had  its  families  of  Dragon  Keeper  (Huan  Lung)  and  its 
Master  of  the  Dragons  (Ya  Lmig).,,i0 

1  Cf.  p.  170. 

a  Chou  I  Iain,  the  last  emperor  of  the  Shang  dynasty. 

*  Ivory  chojisticks  are  very  common  in  China  now,  and  no  luxury. 

4  Viscount  ( 'hi,  one  of  the  foremost  nobles  under  Chou  Hsin,  12th  cent,  b  c. 

*  Dragon  liver  and  unborn  leopard  would  seeai  to  have  been  considered  great 
delicacies. 

0  The  historical  period  comprised  by  the  (  hun-ch  iu  (Spring  and  Autumn) 
between  722  and  481  b.c. 

7  A  principality  iu  Shansi. 

9  A  feudal  lord  under  Duke  Ch'ou  of  Chin  in  S/tansi,  530-524  b.c,  whose 
successors  became  marquises,  and  at  last  kings  of  Wei. 

3  The  grand  historiographer. 

10  Tlio  family  names  Hitan  Lung  and 】Vi  Lung,  ^^g, 御龍 which 
literally  mean  Dragon  Keeper  and  Master  of  the  Dragons,  liave  probably  given  rise 
to  this  queer  story. 


igitized  by  Google 


On  Dragons. 


355 


Viscount  Hsien  observed  that  of  these  two  he  had  heard  also, 
but  did  not  know  their  origin,  and  why  they  were  called  so.  Tsai 
Me  said,  "  In  olden  time  there  was  Shu  Sung 1  of  Liao.'2  Oue  of 
his  distant  ilescendants,  Tung  Fu  was  very  fond  of  dragons.  He 
could  find  out  their  tastes  and  likings,  so  as  to  be  able  to  supply 
them  witli  food  and  drink.  Many  dragons  came  to  him,  and  were 
thus  bred  by  him.  With  them  lie  waited  upon  Shun,  who  bestowed 
upon  him  the  family  name  of  T ung,  and  the  clan-name  of  Dragon 
Keeper  (Huau  Lung),  and  invested  him  witli  Tsung-cK tian.  The 
Tsnng-J  family  were  his  descendants.  Thus  dragons  were  reared 
at  the  time  of  the  emperor  Sh，tn." 

kl  During  the  Hsia  time  K'ung  Chin 3  was  obedient  to  God, 
who  presented  him  with  a  team  of  dragons  from  the  Yellow  River 
and  the  IJan,  there  being  a  male  and  a  female  from  each.  K'ung 
Chin  was  at  a  loss  how  to  feed  tliera,  for  no  member  of  tlie  IJuon 
Lung  family  wns  to  be  found.  But  among  the  remains  of  the  T ao 
T  ang 4  family,  which  had  perislu»d,  was  one  Liu  Lei,  who  had  learned 
the  art  of  rearing  dragons  from  the  Huan  Lung  family.  With  that 
he  served  K'uny  Chin,  aud  was  able  to  give  food  and  water  to  tlie 
dragons.  The  Hsia  ruler  was  so  pleased  with  him,  that  he  con- 
ferred upon  him  tlie  clan-name  of  Master  of  the  Dragons  (Yii  Lung). 
He  took  the  place  of  the  descendants  of  S/iih  Wei"* 

" When  one  female  dragon  died,  he  secretly  had  it  chopped 
up,  and  offered  the  meat  to  the  ruling  emperor  of  the  house  of 
Hs'ta  as  food.  The  emperor  had  it  cooked,  and  asked  for  more. 
Then  Liu  Lei  became  frightened,  because  lie  could  not  procure 
it,  and  emigrated  to  Lu-lusienS'  The  Fan  family  were  his  des- 
cendants."―  , 

Viscount  Htfien  askod,  wliy  tliere  were  no  dragons  to-day. 
Tsai  replied,  "  Sucli  animals  liave  their  officials,  who  know  their 
treatment,  and  think  of  tliem  day  and  night.  When  they  suddenly 
lose  their  post,  the  dragons  die.  The  oasliiered  functionaries  do 
not  feed  them  any  more.  As  long  ;us  the  competent  officials  rlo 
their  duty,  there  are  always  animals  coining  to  them,  but,  whvn 

1  Tho  Lun-hrng  calls  the  man  Shu  Sung.  In  the  Tso-chuan  his  name  is 
Shu  An. 

*  A  small  State. 

•  The  emperor  K'ung  Chia  1879-1848  b.c. 

4  T  oo  Tang  was  the  princedom  of  the  emperor  Too  in  Sha'wi,  whose  des- 
cendants took  their  clan  name  therefrom. 

1  A  noble  who  flourished  under  the  Shanff  dynasty. 
r'  The  modern  Lu-.^han-hftirn  in  llouan. 

23* 


Digitized  by  Google 


356 


Lnn-Heng:  C.  Physical. 


they  are  neglected,  they  lie  down  listless,  and  their  production  is 
stopped." 1 ― 

Thus  、vp  may  say  that  dragons  can  be  reared  and  eaten. 
What  can  be  eaten,  is  certainly  not  a  spirit.  When  the  proper 
officials  are  not  at  hand,  nor  men  like  Tung  Fu  and  Liu  L",  the 
dragons  abscond,  and  hide  themselves,  and  appear  but  rarely.  When 
tliey  once  come  out,  they  also  ride  on  the  douds,  a  course,  maa 
can  never  take,  and  are  then  regarded  as  spirits.  As  long  as  there 
are  the  proper  officials,  or  the  proper  men,  the  dragon  is  like  an 
ox.  Why  should  they  be  spirits? 

Taking  into  consideration  what  the  Shan-hai-ki"ff  says,  the 
evidence  of  S/iM  Tse  and  Han  Fei  Tse,  the  usual  pictorial  rq)resi'nt- 
ations,  the  despair  of  Chi  Tse,  and  the  information  given  by  Ts'ai 
M^,  we  see  that  the  dragon  cannot  be  a  spirit,  nor  rise  to  Heaven, 
and  it  is  evident  that  Heaven  does  not  fetch  it  with  thunder  and 
lightning. 

The  common  belief  that  the  dragon  is  a  spirit,  and  rises  to 
Heaven,  is  preposterous.  But  there  is  a  reason  for  it.  In  light 
literature  、vt'  meet  with  the  statement  that  without  a  tree  one  foot 
high  tlie  dragon  cannot  ascend  to  Heaven.  They  speak  of  ascending 
to  lleavi'u,  and  of  a  tree  one  foot  high,  implying  that  the  dragon 
rises  to  Ht'aven  from  within  the  tree.  The  authors  of  this  sort  of 
literature  are  uncultured  people.  They  have  observed  that  at  the 
same  time,  when  the  thunder  rolls  and  the  lightning  flashes  up, 
the  dragon  rises,  and  when  thunder  and  lightning  strike  a  tree, 
the  dragon  happens  to  be  close  to  the  tree,  just  like  tliunder  and 
liglitnin^;.  When  they  are  gone,  the  dragon  rises  on  liigh  likewise. 
Therefore  tliey  prt'tend  that  it  ascends  to  Heaven  from  within  the 
tree.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  tlie  tliunder  and  tlie  dragon  are  of  the 
same  kind,  and  mutually  attract  one  another,  when  set  in  motion 
by  the  forces  of  nature. 

Tlie  Yiking  says  that  the  flouds  follow  the  dragon,  and  the 
wind  tbe  tiger.  It  is  further  stated  that,  when  the  tiger  howls, 
the  wind  passes  through  the  valh-y,  and  that  the  variegated  clouds 
rise,  when  the  dragon  gambols.2  There  is  a  certain  manner  of 
sympathy  IxMween  tlie  dragon  and  tlie  clouds,  and  a  mutual  at- 
traction between  the  tiger  and  the  wind.    Therefore,  when  Tung 


1  This  conversation  between  Viacoant  Hsien  and  T'/axi  Me  on  the  rearing  of 
dragons  in  ancient  times  is  literally  culled  from  the  Tso-chuan,  Duke  Ch'ao  29th  year. 
Cf.  Legge,  Ch  un-cKiu  Pt.  II,  p.  731. 

- Vikin,,  Book  I，  CUien  hexagram  (No.  I).    See  also  p.  279  Note  2. 


Digitized  by  Google 


一— 


On  Dragons.  357 

(Tiung  Shu  1  offered  the  rain  sacrifice,  he  put  up  an  earthen  dragon 
with  a  view  to  attract  the  rain. 

When  the  summer  is  at  its  height,  the  sun  reigns  supreme, 
but  the  clouds  and  the  rain  oppose  it.  Tlu*  sun  is  fire,  clouds  and 
rain  being  water.  At  the  collision  with  water,  fire  explodes,  and 
gives  a  sound,  which  is  the  thunder.  Upon  hearing  the  sound  of 
thunder,  the  dragon  rises,  when  it  rises,  the  clouds  appear,  and 
when  they  are  there,  the  dragon  mouuts  them.  The  clouds  and 
the  rain  are  affected  by  tlu*  dragon,  and  the  dragon  also  rides  on 
the  clouds  to  Heaven.  Heaven  stretches  to  the  farthest  distance, 
and  the  thunder  is  very  high.  Upon  the  clouds  dispersing,  the 
dragon  alights  again.  Men  seeing  it  riding  on  the  clouds,  believe 
it  to  ascend  to  Heaven,  aud  beliolding  Heaven  bonding  forth  thunder 
and  lightning,  they  imagine  that  Heaven  fetches  the  dragon. 

The  scholars  of  to-day  reading  the  Yiking  and  the  historical 
records,  all  know  that  the  dragon  belongs  to  the  same  class  as  the 
clouds.  Tliey  adhere  to  the  common  gossip  without  knowing,  what 
it  means.  Besides  they  look  upon  the  light  literature  as  an  author- 
ity.  Tlius  tbey  say  that  Heaven  fetches  the  dragon. 

Heaven  does  uot  do  that,  nor  does  the  dragon  rise  to  Heaven. 
When  Lu  Chiu  I  hi"  slew  the  t^vo  serpents,  lie  dragged  them  out  with 
his  hands  by  the  tail,  but  the  moment  they  were  out  of  the  pool,  a  thun- 
der-bolt fell.  Serpents  arc  a  species  similar  to  dragons.  When  serpents 
or  dragons  make  their  appearance,  clouds  and  rain  arrive,  upon  their 
arrival  there  is  thunder  and  lightning.  If  Heaven  really  ft-tched  the  dra- 
gon for  its  own  use,  what  benefit  would  it  have  from  fh'ad  serpents? 

Fish,  though  living  in  tlie  water,  yet  follow  the  clouds  and 
the  rain  flying,  and  riding  on  them  ascend  to  Heaven.  The  dragon 
belongs  to  the  class  of  fish,  it  rides  on  thunder  and  lightning  in 
the  same  way  as  tl»e  fisl)  lly.  For  following  the  clouds  and  the 
rain,  fisli  are  not  considered  to  be  spirits,  the  dragons  alone  are 
called  spirits  because  of  their  riding  on  thunder  and  lightning.  This 
common  belief  is  contrary  to  truth. 

All  the  creatures  in  the  world  liave  their  peculiar  vehicles: ― 
The  wator  serpents  ride  on  the  fog,  the  dragons  on  the  clouds, 
and  birds  on  the  wind.  To  call  the  dragon  alone  a  spirit,  because 
it  is  seen  riding  on  the  clouds,  would  not  be  in  accordance  with 
its  real  nature,  and  would  only  detract  from  its  skill. 

But  the  reason  why  tlie  dragon  is  looked  upon  as  a  spirit  is, 
because  it  can  expand  and  rontract  its  body,  and  make  itself  visible 


A  scholar  of  the  2nd  cent.        See  p.  39. 


igitized  by  Google 


：仏 8 


Lun-Hong:  C.  Physical. 


or  invisible.  Yet  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  body  and 
its  visibility  and  invisibility  do  not  constitute  a  spirit. 

Yil  Jang 1  swallowed  charcoal  and  varnished  his  body,  so  that 
he  got  ulcers,  and  nobody  recognised  him.  Tse  Kung a  burned  off 
his  beard,  and  took  the  semblance  of  a  woman,  so  that  nobody 
knew  him.  When  the  dragon  transforms  itself  and  absconds,  men 
are  also  unable  to  perceive  it,  sucli  is  its  skill  in  metamorphosing 
and  hiding  itself. 

Much  in  the  nature  of  creatures  is  spontaneous ： ― The  rhino- 
pi  thecus 8  knows  the  past,4  magpies  foresee  (he  future,5  and  parrots 
can  talk.  These  three  peculiarities  may  be  compared  to  the  trans- 
formations, which  are  in  the  nature  of  dragons.  If  by  astuteness 
one  could  become  a  spirit,  Yii  Jang  and  Tse  Knug  would  be  spirits. 

Con/ucitis  said,  "  The  roving  animals  can  be  ensnared,  the  (lying 
birds  be  shot  witli  an  arrow.  As  regards  the  dragon,  1  do  not 
know,  whether  it  ran  ride  on  the  wind  and  the  clouds,  and  thus 
rise  ou  high.  To-day  I  saw  Lao  Tse.  Should  lie  perhaps  be  liko 
a  dragon? "8 

Provided  that  the  dragon  rises,  mounted  on  a  cloud,  and, 
when  the  cloud  disperses,  comes  down  again,  then  the  class  of 
creatures,  to  、vli"'h  it  belongs,  might  be  ascertained,  and  all  about 
its  celestial  and  terrestrial  state  known.  Yet  they  say  that  Cou/wiu.s 
did  not  know.  A  sage  like  Coufucim  ignored  tlie  nature  of  dragons. 
How  much  less  can  oomnion  people  know,  whose  learning  is  de- 
ficient, who  are  biassed  in  favour  of  the  marvellous,  and  whose 
minds  are  unable  to  decide,  what  is  possible  and  wliat  not.  That 
they  should  call  the  dragon  a  spirit,  which  rises  to  Heaven  c<iu 
therefore  be  no  matter  for  surprise. 

1  A  native  of  the  Chin  State,  5th  and  <>th  cent.  b.c.  He  twice  made  an  at- 
tempt npon  thn  life  of  Viscount  HMang  of  C/iao  to  aveeige  the  death  of  his  master, 
the  Earl  of  Chih,  whom  Ihiang  had  slain.  Both  attempts  failed.  The  second  time 
ho  disguised  himself  in  the  way  described  here. 

1  A  disciple  of  ('onfucius. 

3  A  kind  of  monkey  in  western  China. 

4  This  probably  means  that  monkeys  have  an  excellent  memory. 

4  Magpies  are  believed  to  know,  whether  the  next  year  will  bo  very  stormy, 
for  in  that  caao  they  build  their  nests  near  the  ground.  Moreover,  they  annoance 
future  joy,  lience  their  popular  name  "  birds  of  joy." 

6  A  quotation  from  the  Biography  of  Lao  Tse  in  the  Shi-chi  chap.  (33,  p.  2  v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Argument*  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


35J) 


CHAPTER  XXX. 
Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures  {Chiang-jui). 

The  scholars  in  their  essays  claim  for  themselves  the  faculty 
of  knowing  the  plicenix  an<l  the  unicorn,  wlien  they  see  them. 
They,  of  course,  rely  on  tlie  pictures  of  the  phcrnix  and  the  uui- 
corn.  Besides  there  is  a  passage  in  the  CA  un-ck in  concerning  the 
capture  of  a  unicorn  to  the  e fleet  that  it  was  a  sort  of  a  deer  with 
a  horn.1  Heuce  a  deer  with  a  horn  must  be  a  unicorn.  W  hen  they 
see  a  bird  like  a  ph(£tiix,  they  take  it  for  a  phoenix. 

Huang  77，  Yaos  Shun,  and  the  sovereigns  of  the  Chou  dynasty, 
wlien  it  wa8  flourishing,  all  caused  the  phecnix  to  make  its  appear- 
ance. Under  the  reign  of  Hsiao  Ihilan  Ti2  a  phepnix  alighted  in 
the  Shang-lin  park,  and  afterwards  also  on  a  tree  at  tlie  east-gate 
of  the  Chang-b  palace.  It  wa«  five  feet  high,  and  had  a  beautiful 
variegated  plumage.  The  unicorn  caught  by  the  people  of  Chou 
resembled  a  deer,  and  】m(l  a  horn;  the  unicorn  of  Wu  Ti  was  also 
like  a  deer  with  a  horn.  If  there  be  a  huge  bird  with  a  varie- 
gated plumage,  or  an  animal  shaped  like  a  deer  having  one  horn 
on  its  head,  it  is  possible,  they  fancy,  to  determine,  whether  it  be 
a  phcenix  or  a  unicorn,  by  referring  to  drawings  and  pictures,  and 
to  ancient  and  modern  traditions. 

Now  the  phcenix  is  the  holy  bird,  and  the  unicorn  the  holy 
animal  as  the  Five  Kmperars,  the  Three  Rulers,  Kao  Yao,  and  Con- 
fucius are  the  holy  ones  among  men.  The  Twelve  Holy  Men3  vary 
considerably  in  their  appearance,  can  we  tlien  oall  a  deer  with  a 
horn  a  unicorn,  or  a  bird  resembling  a  phcenix  by  this  name?  Be- 
tween the  hair  and  the  colour  of  the  holy  birds  aud  the  holy 
animals  there  is  as  mucli  dillerence  as  between  the  osseous  structure 
of  the  twelve  holy  men. 

Tlie  horn  is  like  the  character  "  wu  "  worn  on  the  front.  Chuan 
Hsil  had  this  character  on  his  brow,  but  Yao  and  S/iun  were  not 
necessarily  marked  in  the  same  \v;«v.    If  the  unicorn  caught  in  Lu 

1  The  last  paragraph  of  the  C/t'un-ch'iu,  Duke  Ai  14th  year,  merely  mentions 
the  capture  of  a  tin.  That  it  was  a  deer  with  one  horn  is  recorded  in  the  "  Family 
Sayings  "  of  Confuciu*.    See  Legge'x  transl.  Vol.  II,  p.  834,  Note. 

1  73-48  b.c. 

3  Cf.  p.  304. 


Digitized  by  Google 


360 


Lun-H*ng:  C.  Physical. 


had  a  horn,  it  docs  not  follow  anyhow  that  the  unicorns  observed 
later  on  had  all  a  horn.  Should  we  be  desirous  to  learn  to  know 
the  unicorn  of  the  present  day  by  using  the  unicorn  caught  in  Ln 
as  a  prototype,  we  may  be  sure  to  fail  in  our  endeavour.  The 
fur,  the  bones,  and  the  horn  vary.  Notwithstanding  their  difference, 
there  may  be  a  certain  resemblance,  but  that  does  not  mean  identity. 

Shun  had  double  pupils,  and  Wang  Mnng  also,  Duke  HVy/  of 
Chin  had  his  ribs  all  in  one  piece,  aud  Chang  Yi  likewise.  If  a 
resemblance  be  based  on  the  osseous  structure,  the  hair  and  the 
complexion,  then  Wang  Mang  1  was  a  Shun、  and  (liang  Yi7  a  Duke 
Win  of  Chi"; 

Yh  Jo  in  Lu  bore  a  striking  resemblance  to  Confucius.  After 
the  death  of  the  latter,  liis  disciples  all  made  Yu  Jo  sit  down  and 
questioned  him  cm  some  points  of  the  doctrine,  but  Yu  Jo  could 
not  auswer.  Why?  Because  there  was  only  a  likeness  of  his  ex- 
ternal appearance,  wliereas  Ins  mind  was  different.  Thus,  variega- 
ted birds  and  animals  with  one  horn  may  sometimes  look  like  a 
pliOBuix  or  a  unicorn,  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  tliey  are  not  real 
ones.  Therefore  it  is  a  mistake  to  distinguish  a  phwnix  or  a 
unicorn  by  their  shape,  their  liair,  or  their  colour. 

In  this  manner  did  Yen  Yuan 4  almost  equal  Confucius,  hut  he 
was  not  like  him,  whereas  Yu  Jo,  quite  an  ordinary  type  of  man, 
looked  like  a  sage.  Consequently  a  real  phcenix  or  a  real  uuicorn 
may  perhaps  not  look  like  it,  in  its  outward  shape  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  quite  common  birds  and  animals  resemble  the  real 
phcenix  and  unicorn  by  their  hair  and  colour.  How  can  t\wy  be 
distinguislied  ？  The  literati  who  maintain  that  they  are  able  to 
recognise  a  plicrnix  or  a  unicorn,  when  they  see  tliem,  must  also 
say  of  themselves  that  tliey  know  a  holy  man,  wlien  they  per- 
ceive him. 

Kao  Yao  had  a  horse  mouth,  and  Conftichts'  arms  were  turned 
backwards.5  If,  later  on,  their  wisdom  far  exceeded  that  of  other 
people,  still  they  could  not  be  called  sages  ou  account  of  tlie  horse 
mouth  or  the  concave  foreliea<l,  for  as  the  features  of  tbe  Twelve 
Holy  Men  differed  from  those  of  former  sages,  they  cannot  be 
characteristic  eitlier  for  future  sages.  The  configuration  of  the 
bones  differs,  as  do  their  names  and  their  physical  frame:  and  they 

1  The  usurper. 

a  A  political  adventurer,  cf.  p.  115. 

*  An  enlightened  sovereign,  cf.  p.  162. 

4  Disciple  of  Confucmt. 

&  Cf.  p.  304. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


:^i 


are  born  in  different  places.  Therefore,  how  could  a  sage  be 
known,  provided  that  one  were  born  again? 

Huan  CMn  Shan 1  said  to  Yang  Tse  Yiln,2  "  If  in  future  gener- 
ations there  should  be  again  a  man  like  the  sages,  people  would 
be  well  aware  that  his  talents  surpassed  theirs  by  far,  but  they 
would  not  be  able  to  know,  whether  lie  really  was  a  holy  man 
or  not."    Yang  Tse  YQn  replied,  "  So  it  is,  indeed." 

It  is  difficult  to  know  a  sage.  Even  men  like  Huan  Chun 
S/ian  and  Yang  Tse  YQn,  who  could  judge  the  excellence  and  the  at- 
tainments of  a  sage,  felt  incompetent.  The  scholars  of  the  age 
represent  mediocrity.  The  knowledge  of  mediocrity  consists  ia  the 
combination  of  ordinary  observations,  but  wc  can  be  sure  that,  on 
seeing  a  sage,  tbey  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  recognise  him 
as  such.  Being  unable  to  recognise  a  sage,  they  could  not  know 
a  phcenix  or  a  unicorn  either.  Why  must  people  at  the  present  day, 
who  are  speaking  of  the  ph(eiiix  and  the  unicorn,  pretend  that 
tbey  have  sucli  a  knowledge? 

Id  former  generations  people  used  the  words  phoenix  and  uni- 
corn merely  upon  hearing  of  the  queerness  of  a  bird  or  an  auimal. 
If  those  had  a  peculiar  plumage  or  horn,  and  if  they  did  not  fly 
at  random,  or  wildly  roam  about,  struggling  for  their  food  with 
other  birds  or  animals,  tliey  were  called  plicenix  or  unicorn.  The 
knowledge  which  tlie  men  of  to-day  have  of  the  sages  is  of  very 
much  the  same  kind.  They  have  been  told  that  sages  are  wonder- 
ful men.  Therefore,  when  a  man's  body  sliows  some  peculiarity 
of  the  bones,  and  his  wisdom  is  profound  and  extensive,  they  call 
him  a  sage.  Those  who  really  know  wliat  a  sage  means,  do  not 
give  that  name  at  first  sight,  and  when  they  have  lieard  a  man 
for  the  first  time.  Tliey  first  bow  to  him,  hear  his  lectures,  and 
receive  his  instruction,  and  afterwards  learn  to  know  him.  This 
will  become  more  clear  from  the  following  facts. 

When  Tse  Kung  had  served  Confucius  one  year,  lie  thought 
himself  to  be  superior  to  Confucius,  after  two  years  lie  thought 
himself  to  be  his  equal,  but  after  three  years  he  had  learned  that 
lie  could  never  come  up  to  him.  During  the  space  of  one  and 
two  years,  he  did  not  yet  know  that  Confucius  was  a  sage,  and  it 
was  not  until  three  years  had  elapsed,  that  he  became  aware  of 
it.   If  Tse  Kung  required  three  years  to  find  this  out,  our  scholars 

1  Huan  Tan  =  Huan  Chin  Shan  lived  in  the  1st  cent.  b.c.  and  a.d.  He 
was  a  man  of  wide  learning.  Of  his  works  the  " Htin-lun "  "New  Reflections " 
have  been  preserved. 

2  The  Confucian  philosopher,  cf.  p.  391. 


MY2 


Lun-Hcng:  C.  Physical. 


must  be  in  error,  when  they  imagine  they  know  a  sage,  for  they  are 
less  gifted  than  Tse  Kwig,  they  see  a  sage,  but  do  not  study  under 
him,  nor  have  they  three  years  intercourse  with  him,  a  sudden 
glance  is  all  they  rely  upon. 

In  Lu,  Shoo  Citing  Mao 1  was  placed  on  a  level  with  Confucius. 
The  school  of  Confucius  was  tliree  times  full,  and  three  times  empty. 
Only  Yen  Yuan  did  not  leave  him.  Yen  Yuan  alone  knew  that  Con- 
fucius was  a  sage.  The  other  pupils  abandoned  Confuchts,  and  re- 
turned to  Shtut  Ch^ng  Mao,  Not  only  (lid  they  not  understand  the 
sageliood  of  Confucius,  but  they  did  not  even  know  Sliao  Chhig  Mao. 
The  disciples  were  all  imposed  upon,  so  that  Tse  Kung  asked  Con- 
fucius saging,  "  Shao  Citing  Mao  is  a  famous  man  in  /,",  how  can 
you  know  more  about  government  than  he? "  Con/itcim  replied, 
" Tse  Kung\  You  had  better  leave  this,  for  you  are  not  up  to  it." 

Only  the  intelligent  can  distinguish  the  artificial.  Since  a  man 
like  Tse  Kung  was  unable  to  know  a  sage,  it  is  nonsense,  if  our 
scholars  claim  to  know  a  sage  upon  seeing  him.  From  their  in- 
ability to  know  a  sage  we  may  infer  that  tliey  do  not  know  a 
phrenix  or  a  unicorn  either. 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  phcrnix  has  long  and  broad  feathers, 
and  that  the  body  of  a  unicorn  is  high  and  big.  Then  the  be- 
holder would  regard  them  as  a  big  bird  or  a  huge  animal,  but  by 
what  should  he  distinguish  thorn?  If  their  big  size  were  to  be 
taken  as  a  criterion,  then  one  ought  to  know  a  sage  by  his  size 
also.  During  tho  "  Spring  and  Autumn  ，，  Period  there  arrived  a  bird 
atul  n'liiaiiied,  but  it  could  not  bf  considered  a  phefnix,  and,  when 
the  tall  Ti2  made  their  appearance,  they  could  not  be  taken  for 
sages  either.  The  pturnix  aud  tl"'  unicoru  being  like  other  birds 
or  animals,  what  <ran  people  do  to  know  them  ？ 

Should  theso  creatures  not  live  in  China  and  come  across  the 
desert,  they  would  be  like  tlie  "  mainah,"3  which  is  not  a  Chinese 
bird;  nor  would  the  plicrnix  and  the  unicorn  be  Chinese  ani- 
mals then.  Why  then  do  the  Literati  decry  the  "  mainah,"  and 
applaud  the  phdMiix  and  the  unicorn,  if  none  of  them  is  of  Chi- 
nese origin? 


1  iSAoo  Cheng  Mao,  a  high  officer  of  Im，  was  later  on  executed  by  Confuciu» 
for  high  troason,  when  Confucius  was  assistant-minister  (Shi-c/ii  chap.  47,  p.  Ov.). 
Some  say  that  Shao-chdntj  is  the  official  title  and  Mao  the  cognomen.  Shao-chenrj 
might  mean  a  subdirector.  or  an  assistant-judge.  (Cf.  llnai  Nan  T «e  XIII,  22  wmm.) 
See  also  Chavannes,  M»m.  Hint.  Vol.  V,  p.  326,  Note  7. 

i  Cf.  Chap.  XXXIX. 

3  Acridotherea  cristatellas. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


Some  one  may  say  that,  wlicn  at  tlie  time  of  [Jsiao  Hsiian  Ti 
a  pli<i>nix  alighted  in  the  Shang-lin  park,1  flocks  of  birds  crowded 
around  it  on  tlie  trees,  thousands  and  ten  thousands.  They  rever- 
ently followed  the  plia'uix,  because  it  surpassed  all  the  otlier  birds 
by  its  si/.c  as  well  as  by  the  holiness  of  its  spirit.  Provided  that 
a  large  bird  around  which,  when  it  alights,  all  the  multitudes  of 
bird 8  gather,  is  a  plucnix,  then  we  would  know  what  a  phoenix 
really  is.  Now  the  plurnix  has  the  same  character  as  the  unicorn. 
If,  when  a  phcenix  appears,  all  the  birds  follow  it,  then  all  the 
animals  ought  to  accompany  the  unicorn,  wheu  it  shows  itself, 
likewise.  But  in  regard  to  tlie  unicorn  of  (he  "Spring  and  Autumn" 
no  mention  is  made  of  all  the  animals  following  it.  Hsdan  Ti  and 
Wu  Ti  both  got  a  unicorn,  but  nothing  is  said  about  animals  ac- 
companying it. 

Should  anybody  be  of  opinion  that  tlie  train  of  the  unicorn 
disperses,  when  it  is  caught  by  man,  wliereas  the  phcruix  is  never 
caught,  and  that  the  birds  following  it  become  visible,  when  it  is 
flying  about,  I  refer  to  the  Shukinp.  There  we  read  that,  when 
tlie  nine  parts  of  the  imperial  music  were  performed,  the  male  and 
female  phcenix  came  gambolling.2  The  Tn-chuan  5  speaks  of  a  phornix 
on  the  trees,  but  does  not  mention  that  flocks  of  birds  were  following 
it.   Was  the  pluenix  attracted  by  Hsflan  Ti  of  another  kind  perhaps? 

One  might  suggest  that  this  is  an  omission  on  the  part  of 
the  chronicler,  that  under  Yil's  reign  the  plurnix  was  really  ac- 
companied by  other  birds,  that  tlie  time  of  remote  antiquity  is  so 
fatv  away,  that  the  chroniclers  might  well  have  omitted  to  mention 
it,  and  that  the  text  of  the  Classics  cannot  be  a  proof.  Of  course, 
it  may  happen  that  something  has  re  .ally  taken  place,  wliich  the 
historians  have  dropped,  but,  in  the  same  way,  it  can  be  the  case 
that  something  really  never  liappcned,  ami  was  invented  by  the 
historians.  Therelbre  it  is  difficult  to  find  out  the  truth  from  the 
text  of  the  works  of  tlie  Literati,  and  our  attempts  to  know  a 
phcBnix  from  its  following  are  in  vain. 

Moreover,  there  are  cunning  fellows  among  men,  who  succeed 
in  winning  followers,  as  there  are  wily  birds,  which  assemble  others 
around  themselves.  Was  the  plinpnix  of  the  time  of  Yil  honest 
then,  and  that  of  FlsiUin  77 '.s  time  a  trickster ?  How  is  it  possible 
that  they  were  both  endowod  with  tlie  virtue  of  holy  men,  and 
that  still  their  actions  should  be  so  dissimilar? 

i  Viip.  359. 

*  Shukmt;,  Yi-chi  Pt.  II，  Bk.  IV,  9  (Legge  Vol,  IH,  Pt  I,  p.  88). 
* 大 傅 •    Thia  must  be  the  name  of  an  ancient  work. 


,一 


Digitized  by  Google 


:";4 


Lun-Hrng:  C.  Physical. 


A  bird  may  perhaps  be  a  plicenix,  although  there  are  no 
birds  following  it,  or  it  may  not  be  a  plurnix,  notwithstanding  the 
great  number  of  birds  flocking  around  it.  The  superior  man  leads 
a  pure  life.  He  preserves  liis  integrity,  and  does  not  care  to  have 
many  adherents.  In  his  doings  and  dealings  he  has  not  many 
followers.  A  cunning  intriguer,  on  the  other  haud,  uses  all  his  energy, 
and  hustles  about  so  much,  that  the  scholars  gather  around  him 
like  clouds.  The  plurnix  is  like  the  superior  man.  If  the  number 
of  followers  were  to  decide,  whether  a  bird  is  a  phccnix  or  not. 
then  a  cunning  impostor  ought  to  be  considered  a  superior  man. 

The  more  refined  a  sons  is,  the  fewer  are  tlie  persons  wlio 
can  sing  to  the  tune,  and  the  more  disinterested  one's  actions  are, 
the  fewer  are  one's  sympathisers.  Tlie  same  holds  good  for  birds  and 
animals.  To  find  out  a  plicnnix  by  tlie  number  of  its  followers  would 
be  like  calling  a  song  a  good  one,  because  it  can  be  sung  by  many. 

The  dragon  belougs  to  a  similar  class  of  animals  as  the 
plice'nix.  Under  tlie  reign  of  llsilan  Ti 1  a  yellow  dragon  came  out 
at  Ihin-f^ng,2  but  the  snakes  did  not  accompany  it.  The  "  spirit 
bird"  and  the  "  luan  "  take  a  prominent  place  among  the  common 
birds.  Although  their  goodness  and  their  lioliness  be  not  as  devel- 
oped as  that  of  the  pho»nix,  still  they  ought  to  have  a  suite  of 
at  least  some  ten  birds. 

Hsin  Ling  and  Meng  Ch  ang^  entertained  three  thousand  guests, 
and  were  called  wise  and  superior  men.  The  Ha"  general  Wei 
Ch'ing*  and  the  general  Ho  Cli  a  lHng 5  liad  not  a  single  guest  iu 
their  liousos,  famous  generals  though  tliey  were.  The  Grand  An- 
nalist notes  that  robber  Che,  in  spite  of  all  his  misdeeds,  had  several 
thousand  partisans,  whoreas  Po  Yi  arid  Shu  C/i  i8  lived  in  conceal- 
ment on  Mount  Shao-yany. 

The  actions  of  birds  and  animals  are  like  those  of  man.  A 
man  may  win  tlie  <;ro\vd,  but  that  is  not  sufficient  to  characterize 
him  as  a  wise  man.  Thus  the  fact  that  other  birds  follow  it,  is 
not  a  sufUcicut  testimony  for  a  plurnix  either. 

Some  say  tliat  the  plurnix  and  the  unicorn  are  omens  of  uni- 
versal peace,  and  that  at  a  rime  of  universal  peace  one  sees  them 

1  73-48  b.c. 

2  A  locality  iu  Shfnri  province. 

3  The  princes  of  H>Hn  Ling  and  of  Mmg  Ch'amf,  cf.  chap.  XL. 
*  V<d.  ]».  303. 

&  A  celebrated  commander,  who  gained  many  brilliant  victories  over  the 
Hriung-nu.    Died  117  b.c. 

8  Cf.  p.  168. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Arguments  on  Omuious  Creatures. 


:\G5 


arrive.  However,  they  also  appear,  when  there  is  not  universal 
peace.  By  their  quaint  plumage  and  extraordinary  bones  they 
distinguish  themselves  from  the  ordinary  birds  and  animals,  and 
can  be  known.  Provided  that  the  phoenix  and  the  unicorn  usually 
arrive  at  a  time  of  general  peax^e,  then  the  unicorn  of  the  Spring 
aud  Autumn  period  roust  have  disliked  to  appear  during  the  reign 
of  Confucius.  When  the  Emperor  Kuang  Wu  Ti 1  was  born  in  the 
Chi'tjang  palace,  a  phoenix  came  down.  Kuang  Wu  17s  birth  fell  in 
the  time  of  Ching  7i2  and  ^4/  7Y，3  by  no  means  a  time  of  universal 
peace,  nevertheless  the  plicenix  made  its  appearance.  If  it  did  so, 
because  it  knew  Kuang  Wu  Ti's  wisdom  and  virtue,  then  it  was  an 
omen  of  the  birth  of  a  holy  emperor,  but  not  a  sign  of  universal 
peace.  Lucky  omens  may  correspond  to  universal  peace  or  happen 
to  mark  a  special  birth.  It  is  difficult  to  find  out  the  real  cause. 
Therefore  it  would  not  be  proper  to  think  of  a  period  of  universal 
peace  only. 

Some  say  that  the  phcenix  and  the  unicorn  are  born  as 
members  of  a  certain  species  of  animals,  just  as  the  tortoise  and 
the  dragon  belong  to  a  certain  species.  For  this  reason  a  tortoise 
will  always  beget  a  tortoise,  and  a  dragon  will  always  beget  a 
dragon.  In  shape,  colour,  and  size  the  offspring  does  not  differ 
mucli  from  the  progenitors.  Why  should  it  not  be  possible  for 
us  to  know  these  animals,  seeing  the  father  and  beholding  the  son 
and  the  grand-son? 

For  the  following  reason.  Common  creatures  have  their  species, 
but  ominous  creatures  have  not  ;  they  are  born  by  accident.  There- 
fore they  say  that  the  tortoise  and  the  dragon  are  endowed  with 
virtue.  How  can  people  distinguish  a  spiritual  tortoise  or  a  divine 
dragon,  when  they  perceive  them  ？ 

At  the  time  of  King  Yuan  of  Sun//  *  fishermen  caught  a  spiritual 
tortoise  in  their  nets,  but  they  did  not  know  that  it  was  a  spirit. 
The  scholars  of  our  days  are  like  those  fishermen.  Since  the 
fishermen  did  not  know  a  spiritual  tortoise,  we  may  be  sure  tliat 
the  people  of  to-day  do  not  know  a  divine  dragon  either. 

Sometimes  a  dragon  is  like  a  snake,  and  sometimes  a  snake 
resembles  a  dragon.  Han  Fci  Tse  remarks  that  a  horse  resembling 
a  stag  is  worth  one  thousand  chin.  An  excellent  horse  resembles 
a  stag,  and  a  spiritual  dragon  sometimes  looks  like  a  snake.  If 

1  25-58  a.d. 
>  32-6  b.c. 

■    6  B.C-1  A.D. 

«  530-515  b.c. 


d  by  Google 


366  Ltui-Heng:  C.  Physical. 

those  creatures  really  belonged  to  a  certain  species,  there  would 
he  no  discrepancy  in  shape  or  colour. 

During  tlie  time  of  Wang  Mang 1  there  was  an  enormous  bird, 
as  big  as  a  horse,  witli  variolated  plumage  adornctl  with  dragon 
like  ornaments,  whicli,  togetlier  with  several  ten  other  l)ir(ls,  alighted 
in  Oti-l^Un  in  the  State  of  P  ei.2  The  plutuix,  which  during  the 
time  of  llstian  Ti  sat  down  on  (lie  ground,  was  5  feet  high,  which 
would  corresiinnd  to  tlie  size  of  a  horse  afore-mentioned.  Its 
plum.igp  was  multicoloured,  wliicli  would  be  like  the  variegated 
colour  with  dragon  ornaments,  and  the  several  tens  of  birds  would 
be  like  the  flocks  of  birds  all  alighting  at  the  same  time.  If  at 
Jlsflan  Ti  s  time  it  was  a  ph(pnix  in  shape  and  colour,  a»!Coinj)anied 
by  all  the  other  birds,  how  do  we  know  that  it  was  one?  Pro- 
vided it  was,  theu  the  bird  attracted  by  M'W'y  Mang  was  a  plupnix 
likewise.  That  being  the  case,  it  cannot  have  been  an  omen,  since 
Wang  Many  caused  its  appearaiuv,  and  if  it  was  not  a  plucnix, 
how  is  it  that  in  sliape  and  colour  aud,  as  regards  tlie  following, 
it  was  exactly  like  it? 

All  ominous  things  originate  from  a  propitious  fluid.  Born 
in  an  ordinary  species,  tliey  liave  their  peculiar  character,  and 
therefore  become  oinetis.  Thus  the  arrival  of  a  phcruix  is 
like  tlie  appearance  of  the  "  red  ("row."3  If  the  pluenix  is  said 
to  beloug  to  a  species,  is  there  a  distinct  species  of  "  red  crows  " 
also? 

As  regards  the  auspicious  grain,  the  wine  springs,  and  tlie 
sweet  dew,  the  auspicious  grain  grows  amidst  other  grain,  but  it 
lias  its  pi'(ruliar  spikclets,  wherelbro  it  is  called  auspicious  grain. 
The  wine  springs  mid  tlie  sw  eet  dew  flow  forth  sweet  and  nice. 
They  come  from  source's  and  dew,  but  there  is  not  a  special  kind 
of  sweet  dew  in  heaven,  or  a  rortain  class  of  wine  springs  on 
car tli.  During  the  just  roign  of  a  wise  ruler  the  sweet  dew  falls 
down,  and  the  wine  oomes  up. 

T\w  "  felicitous  plant  "4  aud  the  "  vermilion  grass  "  also  grow; 
on  earth  along  with  other  plants,  but  they  do  not  always  sprout 
l'rom  tlu*  same  root.  They  come  lorth  for  a  certain  time,  and  after 
teu  days  or  a  month  they  wither  and  fall  off.    Hence  they  are 

1  9  B.C. -23  A.D. 

2  In  modern  AnAui. 

5  A  propitious  bird  which  appeared  to  V\r«  Wanp,  cf.  p.  130. 

*  The  felicitous  plant,  "  mini/  chin  "  *^  ，  was  found  in  the  court-yard  of 
the  emperor  i'ao.  With  the  waxing  moon  it  grew  one  new  leaf  every  day,  with 
the  waning  moon  one  leaf  drupped  every  day. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


■MM 


considered  as  omens.  The  plirenix  and  the  unicorn  are  omens  as 
well.    Why  should  tliey  form  a  distinct  species? 

When  there  was  perfc(^t  peace  under  the  Chou  dynasty,  the 
people  of  Ydeh-ch  any 1  brought  white  pheasants  as  :i  present.  These 
white  pheasants  were  short-lived  aud  of  white  colour,  but  tliere 
was  uot  a  special  class  of  white  pheasants.  When  the  people  of 
Lit  caught  a  deer  with  one  liorn,  and  called  it  a  uuicorn.  it  dcs- 
<;ended  perhaps  from  a  tli*er,  and  there  was  no  species  of  unicorns. 

Accordingly  the  phcpnix  is  perhaps  also  born  from  a  snow- 
goose  or  a  magpie,  but  di fieri ng  so  inucli  from  the  majority  of 
birds  by  its  quaint  plumage  and  peculiar  feathers,  it  is  given  the 
name  phoenix.  Wherefore  must  it  belong  to  quite  another  class 
than  the  other  birds? 

YuJo'1  said,  "The  position  the  unicorn  takes  among  quadrupeds, 
the  phoenix  takes  among  flying  birds,  Mount  T' "i  among  hills,  and 
the  Yellow  River  and  the  Ocean  among  water-courses."  Consequently 
the  phepnix  and  the  unicorn  are  to  be  classed  together  with  birds 
and  animals,  only  their  shape  and  colour  is  exceptional.  They 
cannot  constitute  a  separate  class.  Belonging  to  tlie  same  category, 
tliey  have  their  anomalies,  by  these  anomalies  they  fall  out  of  the 
common  run,  and  owing  to  this  irregularity  the  distinction  becomes 
difficult. 

Yao  begot  Tan  Cfm,  and  Shun,  Sluing  Chttn.  Shanff  Chfln  and 
Tan  Chu  belonged  to  the  same  species  as  Yrw  arul  Shun,  but  in  body 
and  mind  they  were  abnormal.  Kun  begot  Yil,  and  Ku  Sou,  Shun. 
Shu"  and  Yu  wore  of  the  same  class  as  Kun  and  A'"  Sou,  but  dif- 
fered Irora  them  in  wisdom  and  virtue.  If  we  try  to  sow  the  seed 
of  auspicious  grain,  we  cannot  reap  auspicious  grain  thereby,  but 
we  may  frequently  fin'l  millet  with  abnormal  stalks  or  ears.  People 
beholding  Shu  Liang  Ho  could  not  know  that  he  was  the  father  of 
Confucius,  nor  could  they  see  in  Po  Yfl  tlie  son  of  Confucius.  The 
father  of  Chang  T  nng%  was  5  feet  higlj,  Chang  T  ang  liimself  8.  and 
.his  grand-son  0.  The  phcrnix  of  Hsiao  HsiUin  Ti  measured  5  feet. 
The  bird  from  whicli  it  was  born  perliaps  measured  but  2  feet, 
and  the  own  offspring  of  the  phepnix  only  1  foot,  for  why  should 
a  species  be  quite  stereotype?  Since  classes  and  species  are  not 
stereotype,  Tsiny  I  hi  had  a  son,  Ts^ng  Sh^n,*  whose  character  was 

1 邀常. I"  chap.  XL  wc  read  Yueh-shang 越裳， which  were  a  people 
near  the  Annaniese  frontier. 
a  See  above  p.  3H<  >. 

3  Chang  T'ang  lived  at  the  beginnint;  of  the  1st  cent.  A.n.  Vid.  chap.  XXXVIII. 
*    Tsttiij  7>r,  tho  well  known  ilisri|)|.«  <>('  (  onfurim,  c!'.  \u 


Digitized  by  Google 


:U58 


Lun-H^ng:  C.  Physical. 


unique,  and  Yen  Lu  was  father  to  Yen  Hui,  who  outshone  every 
one  iu  ancient  and  modern  times.  A  thousand  Li  horse  must  not 
be  the  colt  of  a  unicorn,  and  a  bird  may  be  benevolent  aud  wise 
without  being  the  fledgeling  of  a  phoenix. 

The  brooks  on  the  mountain  tops  are  not  ronnectetl  with 
rivers  and  lakes,  still  they  are  full  of  fish.  The  generative  power 
of  the  water  has  produced  them  independently.  On  the  terraces 
of  ruined  palaces  and  crumbling  halls  grows  grass,  sent  forth  by 
the  force  of  tlie  soil  of  itself.  The  fish  in  the  brooks  and  the 
grass  on  the  terraces  of  tlie  halls  have  no  progenitors  of  their  own 
species.  In  the  same  manner  an  omen  corresponding  to  something 
happens  spontaneously,  there  is  not  a  special  class  for  it  in  the 
world. 

An  omen  corresponds  in  the  same  way,  as  a  calamitous  event 
supervenes.  The  omen  corresponds  to  something  good,  a  calamity 
to  something  bad.  Good  and  bad  are  opposite^,  it  is  true,  but 
tlie  corresponding  is  the  same.  As  a  calamitous  revolution  does 
not  belong  to  a  class,  au  omen  corresponding  to  something  has 
no  species.  The  fluids  of  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  are  the  fluids  of 
Heaven  and  Earth.  Falling  in  with  something  good,  they  harmonize 
with  it,  and  meeting  something  bad,  they  suddenly  turn.  Do  Heaven 
and  Earth  in  addition  to  the  government  which  they  exercise  over 
good  and  evil  still  produce  a  liarmonious  and  a  suddenly  changiug 
fluid?  By  no  means:— wlien  an  omen  corresponds  to  sometliing, 
it  is  not  of  a  certain  class  or  category,  but  it  comes  forth  along 
with  something  good,  and  grows  from  the  harmony  of  the  fluids. 

Sometimes  during  a  peaceful  administration  ami,  while  the 
fluids  are  in  harmony,  various  creatures  undergo  a  metamorphosis. 
In  spring  e.  g.  the  eagle  changes  into  a  pigeon,  and  in  autumn  tlie 
pigeon  becomes  an  eagle.  Snakes,  mice,  and  the  like  are  trans- 
formed into  iisli  and  turtles,  frogs  into  quails,  sparrows  into  clams. 1 
These  creatures  change  in  accordance  with  their  fluids.  Their 
existence  cannot  be  denied.  Huang  ShUt 2  became  an  old  man,  pre- 
sented ('hang  Liang  with  a  book,  and  tlien  became  a  stone  again. 
The  Literati  know  this.  Perhaps  at  tin-  time  of  universal  peace, 
when  all  tlie  fluids  are  in  harmony,  a  deer  might  be  transmuted 
into  a  unicorn,  and  a  snow-goose  into  a  plupnix.  In  this  way  the 
nature  of  unimals  would  be  changed  at  times,  but  there  would  not 
be  a  stereotype  species. 


1  Cf.  p.  336  Note  2. 
， I.  e.  "  Yellow  Stoue. 


Digitized  by  Go 


Arguments  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


369 


Pao  Sse、  was  the  daughter  of  a  black  lizard ,  and  born  from 
the  saliva  of  tvvo  snakes.2  Two  ministers  of  Chin  were  the  progeny 
of  a  brown  and  a  spotted  bear.3  The  stories  about  the  eating 
of  the  swallow's  egg,*  and  the  pearl-barley,5  and  the  walking  upon 
an  enormous  foot-print8  are  likewise  accepted  by  the  people  of 
to-tlay,  wliy  then  shall  tlie  omens  belong  to  a  stereotype  species  ？ 
If  we  consider  the  question  from  the  point  of  view  tliat  creatures 
have  not  a  well-defined  species,  nor  men  a  separate  class,  and  that 
a  body  can  be  metamorphosi/.od,  then  the  plurnix  and  the  unicorn 
arc  not  born  from  an  uncliangeable  species.  But  wherefore  must 
they  be  alike  then  in  shape  and  colour? 

We  rear!  in  the  chapter  ou  omens  in  the  Liki7  that  the  male 
plurnix  is  called  "  F4ng "  and  the  female  4*  Huang^  and  that  the 
male  sings  "t7"'，  chi,"  and  tlie  tVmale  "  ts,"  teu." 8  In  the  SJii- 
kiny  \vc  find  the  following  verses:  —  "  The  oil  tree  in  growing  on 
yoiuh'r  high  hill,  aud  the  uiak*  and  leniale  plurnix  is  singing  there 
in  the  nioruiiig  sun-sliine.  Luxuriant  and  llourisliiii«;  is  the  tree, 
y,ot9i  c/"W<»  chieh"  sing  (lie  plurnixos." ― The  chapter  on  omens 
as  well  as  the  Sh iking  describe  the  singing  of  the  pluvuix,  the 
one  as  "chi  cl"、  tm  ts,i,"  tin*  other  as  " y**ngy  yung,  chief c/";,/'.，， 
Tli«'se  sounds  diflVr.  Provided  that  they  are  really  like  this,  then 
the  shape  of  the  birds  cannot  bo  the  same,  and  if  it  is,  then  there 
is  a  discrepancy  lictween  tlie  Shiking  and  the  Lilci.  Conse([Ufiitly 
the  common  traditions  about  tlie  singing  of  the  phoRnix  are 
suspicious. 

Of  the  unicorn  caught  in  Lu  it  is  said  that  it  was  a  deer 
with  a  horn,  that  means  that  its  colour  was  like  that  of  a  deer. 
The  colour  of  a  deer  is  invariable,  as  tlie  colour  of  birds  is.  At 
the  time  of  Mm  Wang  a  stream  of  light  appeared  in  the  form  of 
a  crow.  Its  colour  is  said  to  have  bt'cii  red.  Red  not  being  the 
colour  of  crows,  it  is  expressly  stated  that  tlie  colour  was  r»'d. 

1  The  favourite  consort  of  the  Emperor  }'w  Wany,  781-771  h.c. 
， On  this  legend,  sec  ]>.  321. 

3  Fan  \\  rn  T*c  and  f  It  umj  Jiang  ( 'hao  Tst,  cf.  p.  225. 

*  The  inoUicr  of  flsifh,  the  ancestor  "f  the  Yin  dynasty  sunllowod  an  egg 
dropped  by  a  swallow,  and  thci-eupon  coiu-eived.    Ci:  p.  :UK. 

5  The  mother  of  Great 】、i  is  said  to  liave  conceived  after  having  eaten 
pearl-barley.    See  p.  318. 
«  Vul.  p.  3 IS. 

7  Tliere  is  no  chapter  on  oineus,  "  J"i-""'、g,"  in  the  Liki  now. 

*  A  similar  passage  occ  urs  in  the  Htv"sh;h-"、ai-cft 麵 (T  ai-p  inj-r/u-Utn)  2nd 
cent.  B.('. 

' Shiking  Pu  01,  Bit.  II.  Ode  VU1  (Lr^e  Vol.  IV,  lh.  U,  p.  494). 


Digitized  by  Google 


370 


Lnn-Heng:  C，  Pliysical. 


If  the  unicorn  resembled  a  deer,  but  had  a  different  colour,  it  would 
certainly  have  been  added  that  its  colour  was  white  or  blacU.  Now 
the  colour  \v«ns  the  usual  one,  therefore  they  merely  say  that  it 
was  a  deer.  A  (leer  is  liornless.1  Since  the  deer  in  question  was 
different  from  the  ordinary  ones  in  this  respect,  it  is  said  that  it 
had  a  horn.  In  this  manner  the  unicorn  cauglit  in  Lu  was  sliapetl 
like  a  deer. 

During  the  time  of  Wu  Ti  a  hunting  party  in  the  west  caught 
a  white  unicorn  with  one  lioni  and  five  feet.  Tlie  horn  was  then 
as  in  other  cases,  but  the  reference  to  the  five  feet  shows  that  it 
had  not  the  same  number  of  legs.  The  unicorn  found  in  Lu  is 
described  as  a  deer.  The  colour  not  being  mentioned,  it  must 
have  been  a  deer  of  no  unusual  colour.  Wu  Ti  is  reported  to  have 
got  a  white  unicorn.  White  colour  does  not  agree  with  a  unicorn. 
The  statement  that  a  unicorn  is  a  dcor,  means  therefore  that  it  is 
an  ordinary  one,  whereas  the  allegation  that  it  is  a  white  unicorn, 
shows  that  its  colour  is  unusual. 

Under  the  reign  of  Hsiao  Hsilan  Ti  the  ( liiu-chhi 2  sent  as  a 
tribute  a  unicorn  shaped  like  a  deer,  but  with  two  horns.  It  thus 
differed  from  the  UDicQrn  of  Hsioo  Wu  Ti,  to  whicli  one  horu  is 
ascribed.  During  the  Spring  and  Autumn  Period  the  unicorn  was 
like  a  deer,  that  of  the  emperor  Hsilan  Ti  is  described  as  resembling 
a  stag.  A  stag  is  double  the  size  of  a  deer,  and  differently  shaped. 
The  unicorns  which  appeared  under  the  reigns  of  those  three 
emperors  vary  very  much,  as  regards  the  colour  of  their  hair,  the 
horn,  the  feet,  and  the  size  of  the  body.  If  we  infer  the  future 
from  these  instances,  it  is  quite  evident  that  the  unicorns  eventually 
appearing  at  the  present  time  will  not  be  like  those  of  former 
generations.  In  this  respect  the  unicorn  is  like  the  plurnix.  The 
unicorns  varied  at  different  periods  in  shape  and  colour.  If  we 
were  to  start  from  the  phcpnix  seen  at  the  time  of  Hsilan  Ti,  measur- 
ing five  feet  and  being  multicoloured,  and  to  foretell  the  future  from 
the  past,  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  maintain  that  a  phecnix 
appearing  later  on  must  be  like  that  one.  There  can  be  uo  doubt 
that  phoenixes  and  unicorns,  winch  will  appear  later  on,  will  not 
resemble  those  observed  formerly.  How  can  the  scholars  assert 
that  on  seeing  them  tliey  would  know  them? 

When  the  people  of  Lu  caught  the  unicorn,  they  dared  not 
straiglitway  call  it  a  uuicorn,  but  said  that  it  was  a  horned  deer. 


China  possessea  several  varieties  of  hornless  deer. 
A  tribe  in  Annam. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Argument1)  on  Ominous  Creatures. 


371 


At  that  time  in  fact  tliey  did  not  know  it.  Wu  Ti  called  upon  the 
consor  Chung  Ckfln  to  give  his  opinion  about  the  unicorn.  Chung 
C/nln  replied  that  it  was  a  wild  animal  with  joined  horns,  showing 
tlmt  the  whole  empire  had  grown  from  the  some  root.  〖Ie  did 
not  at  once  style  it  a  unicorn,  but  declared  it  to  be  a  wild  animal. 
Chung  ('hiln  had  his  doubts  as  well,  and  did  not  know  it.  The 
knowledge  of  the  scholars  of  our  age  does  not  exceed  that  of  the 
people  of  Lu  or  of  Chuny  C/tiln.  Should  they  see  a  phtrnix  or  a 
unicorn,  they  would  certainly  have  the  same  doubts  as  the  latter. 

How  is  it  possible  to  find  out  a  phcrnix  and  a  unirorn  among 
uncommon  birds  and  animals?  If  shape  and  colour  be  taken  as  a 
criterion,  they  are  not  always  alike.  If  there,  be  a  big  train  of 
birds  and  animals  following  them,  this  is  not  always  a  proof  of 
their  excellence.  If  their  rarity  be  regarded  as  a  characteristic*, 
tliere  is  the  "  maiuah "  also,  and  if  importance  be  attached  to 
peculiarities,  then  sages  as  well  as  wise,  men  have  strange  physical 
features.  Both  sages  and  wise  men  are  abnormal,  and  there  is  no 
means  to  distinguish  between  them. 

Taking  wisdom  and  sage n ess  as  a  starting  point,  we  find  that 
sage  birds  and  sage  animals  do  not  possess  more  peculiarities  than 
ordinary  birds  or  common  animals.  The  wisdom  of  sage  or  wise 
men  may  be  quite  extraordinary,  whereas  their  bones  show  no 
anomaly.  Thus  sage  and  wise  birds  and  animals  can  be  endowed 
with  benevolenco,  honesty,  unselfishness,  and  purity,  though  there 
be  nothing  remarkable  in  their  physical  constitution.  Sometimes 
there  are  rich  and  noble  persons  wlio  have  not  the  body  of  a  sage, 
and  the  osstnnis  structure  of  many  points  to  wealth  and  honour, 
who  do  not  prove  to  be  sage  or  wise.  Accordingly  some  birds 
are  multicolour,  and  some  animals  have  a  liorn,  but  arc  devoid  of 
benevolence  or  sageness.  How  do  we  know  then  but  that  the 
plicruixes  and  unicorns,  seen  in  olden  days,  were  common  birds  or 
animals,  and  the  magpies  and  deer  seen  at  present  are  plupnixrs 
and  vinicorns?  The  present  liolv  age  is  tliti  result  of  the  reforms 
emanating  from  and  S/tun,  why  should  no  benevolent  or  wise 
creatures  be  born? 

It  may  l«ap])en  that  phd'iiixca  and  unicorns  arc  mixed  with 
suow-geese,  inagpk'P,  doer  or  sta^s,  so  that  our  people  cannot 
distinguish  them.  When  precious  jade  was  hidden  in  a  stone,  the 
governor  of  the  king  of  C/iu  did  not  know  it,  which  distressed 
the  owner  so  mucli,  that  he  wept  tears  of  blood.1    Perhaps  now- 


i  Cf.  p.  113. 

34* 


372 


Lun  -  Hing :  C.  Physical. 


a-days  the  phcenixes  and  unicorns  also  hide  their  benevolent  and 
wise  heart  under  a  common  plumage  and  ordinary  fur,  and  have 
neither  a  single  horn  nor  five  colours  as  a  distinctive  niarlt,  so  that 
our  people  know  tliem  no  more,  than  the  jade  in  the  stoue  was 
known.  How  ('an  we  prove  that?  By  a  reference  to  the  plants, 
which  at  the  commencement  of  the  Yung-ping  period  1  were  always 
presenting  omens.  When  the  emperor  Hsiao  Ming  Ti  was  mani- 
festing liis  kindness,  all  sorts  of  omens  happened  at  the  same  time. 
At  the  Yuau-ho  and  Chang-lio  epochs,2  wheu  Hsiao  (.'hang  Ti  s  virtue 
was  shining,  perfect  harmony  pervaded  the  world,  and  auspicious 
omens  and  strange  things  corresponded.  Phrp nixes  and  unicorns 
came  forth  one  after  the  other,  an<l  were  observed  on  many 
occasions,  much  more  than  at  the  time  of  the  Five  Emperors.  This 
chapter  was  already  completed,  therefore  I  could  not  mention 
it  tlien.3 

It  might  be  objected  that  arguing  on  omens,  1  have  declared 
that  the  phtrnix  and  the  unicorn  are  hard  to  know,  and  that  the 
omens  of  our  age  cannot  be  distinguished,  whether,  therefore,  the 
phecnixes  an<l  the  unicorns  attracted  now  by  Hsiao  Chang  Ti  coul<l 
not  be  known? 一 I  say  that  according  to  the  "  Records  on  the  Five 
Birds"4  there  are  big  birds  in  the  four  regions  and  the  centre 
whicli,  when  they  roam  about,  are  accompanied  by  all  the  other 
birds.  Iu  size,  and  the  colour  of  the  plumage  they  resemble  a 
phcenix,  but  are  difficult  to  know  indeed. 

Since  tlie  omenis  of  our  age  do  not  allow  of  distinction,  liow 
can  we  find  tliem  out?  By  the  governinent  of  the  empire.  Unless 
tlie  virtue  of  the  reigning  emperor  equalled  tliat  of  Yii,  we  would 
not  perceive  plucnixes  and  unicorns  with  our  own  eyes.  The 
omens  oi*  Yn  were  undoubtedly  genuine,  and  Yao'.s  excellence  is 
evident.  Under  IL'mo  Ihilan  Ti  the  world  enjoyed  a  still  more 
universal  peace  than  at  the  time  of  Yao  and  Shun,  as  far  as  ten 

1  Style  of  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Mi»g  TV,  58-7H  a.d. 
-i  Styles  of  the  Emperor  Chanp  TV,  84-87  and  87-8<). 

3  Tli is  chapter  must  have  been  written  prior  to  S4  a.i>.,  so  that  tlie  auspicious 
reign  of  the  Eui[)eror  rhnmj  Ti  could  not  yet  be  referred  to.  The  author  made 
this  addition  later  i.e.  after  89，  for  it  was  uot  before  tliis  year  that  the  emperor 
received  liis  posthumous  title  Hfiao  Chamj  Ti. 

*  By  the  Five  Birds  jterliaps  the  Five  Pho'nixes  "  Wu  Ftng"  five  differeni 
kinds  of  phu'iiixes,  which  differ  by  their  colours,  arc  meant.  The  "  Fcny  ，•  is  red, 
the  M  Yuan  cku yellow,  the  "  Luan  M  blue,  the  "  )  ii  fou"  purple,  and  the  "  A',< " 
white.  、VI"'reas  "  l"''mj "  and  "  Luan "  are  still  used  as  names  for  tlie  pluenix, 
one  understands  by  " 】-"Hf»  chit  "  a  kind  of  peacock  or  pheasant,  by  "  YH-Ua  "  a 
kind  of  duck,  and  liy  "  A«  •'  tlie  snow-goose  or  swan. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Arguments  on  OniinoaH  Creatures. 


'm 


thousand  Li,  people  were  anxious  for  reforms  aud  progress,  and 
the  moral  laws  fomul  an  cclio  everywhere.  Affected  by  tliis  state 
of  things,  tlio  bencvolout  birds  and  animals  made  their  appearenoc, 
only  the  size,  the  colour  of  the  hair,  the  feet  and  the  wings  of 
those  auspicious  creatures  were  not  always  the  same.  Taking  the 
mode  of  government  and  the  intelligence  of  the  rulers  as  a  criterion 
for  the  various  omens,  we  find  them  all  to  be  genuine.  That 
means  that  they  are  hard  to  know,  but  easy  to  understand. 

The  sweet  dew  may  also  serve  us  as  a  key.  The  sweet  (lew 
is  produced  by  the  harmonious  fluid,  it  has  no  cause  in  itself 
which  could  make  it  sweet :  this  can  only  be  done  by  the  inter- 
vention of  tho  harmonious  lluid.  Wlieu  the  harmonious  fluid 
appears,  the  sweet  dew  pours  down,  virtue  permeates  everything, 
and  the  various  omens  come  forth  together.  From  the  Yung-p  ing 
down  to  the  Chang-ho  period  the  sweet  dew  has  continually  been 
falling.  Hence  we  know  tliat  the  omens  are  all  true,  and  that 
pliGPnixes  and  unicorns  are  likewise  all  genuine. 


igitized  by  Google 


374  Lun-Wng:  D.  Kthical. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 
The  Forming  of  Characters  (Shum^mng). 

Speaking  of  human  nature  one  must  distinguish  good  and  bad 
characters.  The  good  ones  are  so  of  themselves,  the  wicked  can 
be  instructed  and  urged  on  to  do  good.  A  sovereign  or  a  lather 
seeing  that  his  subjects  or  sons  have  good  characters,  provides  for 
thera,  exhorts  them,  and  keeps  them  out  of  the  reach  of  evil.  If 
the  latter  come  into  contact  with  it,  they  assist  and  shield  them, 
and  try  to  win  them  back  to  the  cause  of  virtue.  It  is  by  the 
transition  of  virtue  into  wickedness  and  of  wickedness  into  virtue 
that  the  characters  are  formed. 

The  duke  of  Shuo  admonished  King  Ch4ng  saying: ― "  Now  you 
for  the  first  time  carry  out  Heaven's  decree.  Oh  ！  you  are  like  a 
youth  with  whom  all  depends  on  his  first  years  of  life."  1 

By  youth  is  meant  the  age  up  to  fifteen.  If  a  youth's  thoughts 
are  directed  towards  virtue,  lie  will  be  virtuous  to  the  last,  but  if 
his  propensities  tend  to  badness,  he  will  end  badly. 

The  Shiking  says  "  What  can  that  admirable  man  be  compared 
to?"2  Tlie  Tso-chuan  answers,  "He  is  like  boiled  silk;  dyeil  witli 
indigo,  it  becomes  blue;  coloured  with  vermilion,  it  turns  crimson." 
A  youth  of  fifteen  is  like  silk,  his  gradual  changes  into  good  or 
bad  resembling  the  dying  of  boiled  silk  with  indigo  and  vermilion, 
which  gives  it  a  blue  or  a  nul  colour.  When  tliese  colours  have 
once  set,  tbey  cannot  be  altered  again.  It  is  for  this  reason 
that  Yang  7W3  wept  over  the  by-roads  and  Mi  Tse 4  over  boiled 

1  Shukiny,  The  Announcement  of  Sfiao  V,  Bk.  XII,  18-10.  Wang  Ch'um/  reads 
於戲 "alas!"  instead  of 鳴呼. 

2  Shiking  I，  Bk.  IV,  Ode  IX.  2  where  we  read  now 何 以 -jp 之 " what 
can  he  give?"  instead  of 與之 " what  win  lie  be  compared  to?" 

3  Vang  Chu,  the  pliilosoplier  of  egoism.  The  story  referred  to  here  is  told 
in  Lieh  Tse  VIII,  10 v.  A  sheep  had  been  lost  on  by-roads.  When  Yang  Chu  hoard 
of  it,  he  became  tiiouglitful  and  cliangcd  countenance.  No  iiientioti  is  made  of  his 
having  wept.  W'any  ('humj  seems  to  have  quoted  from  Huai  San  Tse  XVII,  25 v, 
who  expressly  mentions  Yang  7V«V  weeping. 

*  Mt  7V,  the  p!iilosoj)lier  of  altruism.    We  read  in  his  works:— 
chap.  3,  p.  4  ("What  colours)  and  in  the  Lu-'hih  ch  u»-i  h'iu  chap.  2,  No.  4,  p.  8  (Colour- 
ing) that  Mr  7V  witnessing  the  dying  of  silk  said,  leaving  a  niyh,  "  Dyed  blue,  it 
turns  blue,  and  dyed  yellow,  it  turns  yellow  "  and  then  he  goes  on  to  explain,  how 


Digitized  by  Google 


Tlie  Forming  of  Characters. 


：^75 


silk.  They  were  sorrowful,  because  men  having  gone  astray  from 
the  right  path  cannot  be  transformed  any  more.  Human  nature 
turns  from  good  into  bad,  and  from  bad  into  good  only  in  this 
manner.  Creepers  growing  amidst  hemp,  stand  upright  without 
support  by  themselves.  White  silk  yarn  placed  amongst  dark, 
becomes  black  without  boiling.  Creepers  are  not  straight  by  na- 
ture, nor  is  the  black  colour  an  attribute  of  silk  yarn.  Tlic  Iiemp 
affording  support,  and  the  dark  silk  lending  the  colour,  creepers 
and  white  silk  bec-ome  straight  and  black.  Human  nature  bears  a 
resemblance  to  creepers  and  silk  yarn.  In  a  milieu  favourable  to 
transformation  or  colouring,  it  turns  good  or  bad. 

Wang  Liang  and  Tsao  Fu  were  famous  as  charioteers: ― out  of 
unruly  and  vicious  animals  they  made  good  ones.  Had  they  only 
been  able  to  drive  good  horses,  but  incapable  of  breaking  bad  ones, 
they  would  have  been  nothing  more  than  jockeys  and  ordinary 
equerries.  Their  hor»emansbip  would  not  have  been  remarkable 
nor  deserving  of  world-wide  fame.  Of  Wang  Liang  the  saying  goes 
that,  when  he  stepped  into  a  chariot,  the  steeds  knew  no  exhaustion. 

Under  the  rule  of  Yao  and  Shun  people  were  neither  seditious 
nor  iguorant.  Tradition  says  that  the  people  of  Yao  and  Shun 
might  have  been  invested  with  Hefs  house  by  house,1  whereas  tliose 
of  Chieh  Kuei^  were  worthy  of  death  door  by  door.  Tlie  people 
followed  the  way  prescribed  by  the  three  dynasties.  That  the 
people  of  the  holy  emperors  were  like  this,  those  of  the  wicked 
emperors  otherwise,  was  merely  the  result  of  the  influence  of  their 
rulers,  not  of  the  people's  original  nature. 

The  covetous  hearing  of  Po  Yi's3  lame  became  disinterested, 
and  the  weak  resolute.  Tlie  news  of  Liu  HsUi  IIuis*  reputation 
made  the  niggardly  generous  and  the  mean  liberal.  If  the  spread 
of  fame  alone  could  bring  about  sucli  changes,  what  then  must  be 
the  effect  of  personal  intercourse  and  tuition? 

Tin'  seveuty  disciples  of  the  school  of  Confucius  ware  eacli  of 
tlu-ra  «ible  to  creditably  fill  the  post  of  a  minister  of  state.  Con- 
man  also  lakes  tlie  colour  of  hus  eiivironinent.s,  especially  of  those  witli  whom  he  has 
intercourse,  wherefore  "  colouring  "  is  n  very  serious  utTair.  Nothing  is  said  about 
his  having  shed  tears.  » 

1  So  excellent  were  they  all. 

， The  last  emperor  of  the  H^ia  dynasty,  the  type  of  a  tyrant. 

3  l'o  }'i  and  Shu  (  h  i,  tw»>  brotlier.s  famous  for  their  disinterestedness  in  re- 
f using »to  ascend  the  throne  of  their  father,  lest  the  other  should  be  deprived  of  it. 
Mayers  No.  543. 

*  An  official  of  the  State  of  Lu  famous  for  honesty  and  upright  character, 
often  iiioutioncd  hy  C""/uc'"、 


Digitized  by  Google 


370 


Lun-Heng:  D.  Ethical. 


forming  to  the  holy  doctrines,  they  became  accomplished  scholars, 
and  their  knowledge  and  sldll  grew  tenfold.  This  was  the  result 
of  teaching;  thus  latent  faculties  were  gradually  dcvelopi'd.  Before 
thoy  joined  Confucius  school,  they  sauntered  about  in  the  streets  as 
quite  ordinary  and  in  no  wise  exceptional  people.  The  most  un- 
governable of  all  was  Tse  Lu，  who  is  generally  reported  to  have 
been  a  cominon  and  unsteady  individual.  Before  lie  became  Confucius' 
pupil,  lie  wore  a  feather  hat  and  a  pig  skin  belt.  He  was  brutal 
and  unmannerly.  Whenever  he  lieard  some  reading,  he  tossed  up 
liis  feather  hat,  pulled  】iis  belt,  and  uttered  such  a  yell,  that  lie 
deafened  the  ears  of  the  worthies  and  sa^es.  Such  was  his  wicked- 
ness. Confucius  took  】iim  under  his  guidance.  By  degrees  lie  pol- 
ished and  instructed  him.  The  more  he  advanced  in  knowledge, 
the  more  lie  lost  his  fierceness,  and  his  arrogance  was  broken.  At 
last  he  was  able  to  govern  a  slate,  and  ranked  in  the  four  classes. 1 
This  is  a  shining  example  of  bow  a  man's  character  was  changed 
from  bad  into  good. 

Fertility  and  sterility  are  the  original  nature  of  the  soil.  If 
it  be  rich  and  moist,  tlie  nature  is  good,  and  the  crops  will  b«、 
exuberant,  whereas,  if  it  bo  barren  and  stony,  the  nature  is  batl. 
However,  human  efforts: ― deep  ploughing,  thorough  tilling,  and  a 
copious  use  of  manure  may  help  the  land,  so  that  the  harvest  will 
become  like  that  of  the  rich  and  、vell  waterod  fields.  Such  is  tlie 
case  with  the  elevation  of  the  land  also.  Fill  up  the  low  ground 
with  earth,  dug  out  by  means  of  lioes  and  spades,  and  tlie  low 
land  will  be  on  a  level  with  the  liiglj  one.  If  these  works  are  still 
continued,  not  only  will  the  low  land  be  on  a  level,  but  even  higher 
than  tlie  liigli  land.  Th<*  high  ground  will  then  become  the  low- 
one.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  human  natures  are  partly  good, 
partly  bad;  ass  the  land  may  be  either  high  or  low.  By  making 
use  of  the  good  efl'ects  of  education  goodness  can  be  sprea»1  and 
generalized.  Reformation  being  puslu'd  on  and  instruction  perse- 
vered in.  people  will  cliange  and  become  still  bettor.  Gooilncss  will 
increase  and  reacli  a  still  higher  standard  than  it  had  before,  just 
as  low  ground,  filled  up  with  hoes  and  spades,  rises  higher  than 
the  originally  elevatt'd  ground. 

T  se^  though  not  pre(lpt*tinat«'tl  thereto,  made  a  lortinie.  Mis 
capital  increased  without  a  decree  i'roin  Heaven  wliich  would  have 

1  The  four  classes,  into  which  the  ten  principal  followers  of  Conjncins  were 
divided.    Cf.  AnaUcU  XI,  2. 

2  A  disciple  of  f'f»ifiiciw,  whose  full  name  was  Titan  Mu  T'se  alias  Tst  h'nnff, 
possessed  oi  great  abilities.    He  became  a  liigh  official. 


The  Forming  of  Characters. 


'Ml 


him  rich.  The  accumulation  of  wealth  is  due  to  the  cleverness  of 
the  ridi  mon  of  tl"'  time  in  making  a  fortune.  Tlirougli  this  ability 
of  theii-s  tlicy  arc  tliemsrlves  the  authors  of  tlieir  growing  wealtli 
without  a  special  decivc  from  Heaven.  Similarly,  he  who  lias  a 
wicked  nature  changes  his  will  and  liis  doings,  if  be  happens  to 
be  taught  by  a  Sage,  nlthougli  he  was  not  endowed  witli  a  good 
character  by  Heaven. 

One  speaks  of  good  swords  for  which  a  thousand  chin 1  are 
paid,  such  as  tlie  Yil-ch  ang"1  sword  of  T  ang-ch  iz  and  the  T  ai-a 
sword  4  of  Liing-ch  Han.6  Their  blade  is  originally  nothing  more  than 
a  common  pirco  of  iron  t'roin  a  mountain.  l\y  tlie  folder's  smelting 
and  hammering  tht*y  become  sharp-edged.  But  notwitlistanding  this 
smelting  and  hammering  the  material  of  good  swords  is  not  different 
from  others.  All  depends  on  excellent  workmanship  and  on  the 
blade-smith's  ability  in  working  the  iron.  Take  a  sword  worth 
only  one  chin  from  Tung-hsiay  lieat  it  again,  and  forge  it,  giving  it 
suffieioiit  fire,  and  smoothing  and  sharpening  its  edge,  and  it  will 
be  like  a  sword  of  a  thousand  chin.  Iron  and  stones  are  made  by 
Heaven,  still  being  worked,  they  undergo  a  modification  of  their 
substance.  Why  then  should  man,  whose  nature  is  imbued  with 
the  five  virtues,  despair  of  the  badness  of  his  character,  before  he 
has  been  thoroughly  worked  upon  by  Worthies  and  Sages? 

The  skillful  physicians  that  in  olden  days  were  held  in  high 
esteem,  knew  the  sources  where  virulent  diseases  sprang  from,  and 
treated  and  cured  them  with  acupuncture  and  medicines.  Had  they 
merely  known  the  names  of  tlie  complaints,  but  done  nothing  be- 
sides, looking  quietly  on,  would  tliero  liavc  been  anything  wonder- 
ful in  them  ？  Men  wl»o  are  not  good  have  a  disease  of  their  nature. 
To  expect  them  to  change  without  proper  treatment  and  instruction 
would  be  hopeless  indeed. 

The  laws  of  Heaven  can  be  applied  in  a  right  and  in  a  wrong 
way.  Tlie  right  way  is  in  harmony  with  1  leaven,  tho  wrong  one 
owes  its  results  to  human  astuteness,  but  cannot  in  its  effects  be 

1  The  name  of  the  ancient  copper  coins,  which  first  were  called 金 " metal," 
not  "  gold,"  as  may  be  seen  from  the  works  on  coinage. 

2  This  sword  is  said  to  have  been  fabricated  by  the  famous  blade-smith  Ou 
Yeh  in  the  kingdom  of  Ywh. 

3  A  place  in  Honan. 

*  This  sword  is  the  work  of  Ou  l>/<  of  Yueh  and  Kan  Chiaruj  of  Wu,  hoth 
celebrated  sword -cutlers,  who  wrought  it  for  the  King  of  Ch'u. 

5  A  place  inost  likely  in  ( 'liekiaruj,  called  j||  "  Sword  river  "  under  the 
Suny  dynasty.    Pla^air,  Citien  No.  4«50. 


Lun-Hrng:  I>.  Ktliical. 


distinguished  from  the  right  one.  This  will  be  shown  by  the 
following.  Among  the  "  Tribute  of  Yil,f  1  are  mentioned  jade  and 
white  corals.2  Tliese  were  the  produce  of  earth  and  genuine  precious 
stones  ami  pearls.  But  the  Taoists  melt  five  kinds  of  stones,  and 
make  five-coloured  gems  out  of  tlu'in.  Tlieir  lustre,  if  compared  with 
real  gems,  does  not  diirer.  Pearls  in  lisbes  and  shells  are  as  genuine 
as  the  jade-stones  in  the  Tribute  of  Yil.  Yet  the  Marquis  of  Sui3 
made  pearls  from  cheinioala,  whicli  were  as  brilliant  as  genuine  oues.4 
This  is  the  eliinax  of  Taoist  learning  and  a  triumph  of  their  skill. 

By  means  of  a  burning-glass  one  catches  fire  from  heaven. 
Of  five  stones  liquefied  on  the  Ping-wu s  day  of  the  5tli  moon  an 
instrument  is  cast,  which,  wlien  polislied  bright,  held  up  against 
the  sun,  brings  down  fire  too,  in  precisely  the  same  manner  as, 
when  fire  is  caught  in  the  proper  way.  Now,  one  goes  even  so 
far  as  to  furbish  the  crooked  blades  of  swords,  till  they  shine, 
when,  lieltl  up  against  the  sun,  tiiey  attract  fire  also.  Crooked 
blades  are  not  burning-glasses;  that  they  can  catch  fire  is  the  effect 
of  rubbing.  Now,  provided  tho  bad-natured  men  are  of  tlie  same 
kind  as  good-natured  ones,  then  they  fan  be  influfnc^d,  and  induced 
to  do  good.  Should  they  be  of  a  different  kind,  they  cau  also  be 
coerced  in  the  same  manner  as  tlie  Taoists  cast  gems,  Sui  Hou  made 
pearls,  and  people  furbish  the  crooked  blades  of  swords.  En- 
lightened with  learning  and  familiarized  with  virtue,  they  too  begin 
by  and  by  to  practise  heuevolence  and  equity. 

Wlien  Huomj  Ti  fouglit  with  Yen  7i°  for  the  empire,  he  taught 
bears,  leopards,  and  tigers  to  combat  for  】iim  in  tlie  wilds  of  Fan- 
chikin.  After  three  battles  he  gained  liis  eud,  and  Yen  Ti  was  routed. 

Yao  yielded  the  empire  to  S/<un.  Kun,1  one  of  his  vassals, 
desired  to  become  one  of  the  three  chief  ministers,  but  Yao  (lid 

1  The  Tribute  of  }  ii,  Yu-kuny.  is  also  the  name  of  a  book  of  the  Shuking. 
' Cf.  Shaking  Pt.  Ill,  Book  I  (Leyge,  ( '/"、•、"•*  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  p.  127). 
a   A  principality  iu  Ilupei. 

*  Tlie  time  of  this  Manjuis  of  Sui  is  unknown.  His  pearls  are  very  famous 
in  Chinese  literature.  Aocordiiifi  to  one  tradition  the  Marquis  found  a  wounded  snake, 
and  cured  it.  Out  "1'  giatitudi*  tho  snake  |>rescnteti  him  with  a  precidiis  pearl,  which 
.shone  at  night.    W'anrj  ( Vi'i/ny  makes  tlie  Manjuis  produce  artificial  pearls  himself. 

h  A  nn ruber  of  the  sexagenary  cycle  used  for  the  designation  of  years,  months, 
and  days. 

fi  Y'li  Ti  is  usually  identified  with  Sh/71  Xunff  and  said  to  have  been  his 
ptrdofo>Mtr.  lint  we  do  not  lo;un  that  he  l'o'ight  with  Huang  Ti  for  the  empire. 

7   Aocoi'diiig  to  hniiff  Hi,  Kun  一-  i 玄 would  he  the  same  as  fi^  Kun, 
Minister  of  Works,  who  in  \aiii  endeavoured  to  drain  the  waters  of  tlie  great  flood. 
His  son  )"m,  wIhi  suhNC«|iieiitlv  became  emperor,  succeeded  at  last  in  regulating  the 
、v.m'r  roui.ses.    Here  w  socm  to  liavc  a  diflcrrnt  tniditiou. 


Digitized  by  CjOO 


The  Fonning  of  Chararters.  H70 

not  listen  to  this  request.  Thereupon  Awn  became  more  infuriated 
than  even  ferocious  animals  are,  and  wished  to  rebel.  The  horns 
of  animals,  all  in  a  line,  served  him  as  a  rampart,  and  their  lifted 
tails  were  his  banners.  They  opposed  and  tackled  their  foe  with 
the  utmost  determination  and  energy.— If  birds  and  beasts,  which 
are  shaped  othorwise  than  man.  can  nevertheless  be  caused  to  fight, 
liow  much  more  so  man's  own  kindred?  Proceeding  on  this  line 
of  argument  we  liave  no  reason  to  doul)t  that  (by  music)  the  multi- 
tudinous animals  were  made  to  dance,  the  fish  in  the  ponds  to 
come  out  and  listen,  and  the  six  kinds  of  horses  1  to  look  up  from 
their  fodder.2 

The  equalization  of  what  varies  in  difl'orcnt  categories  as  well 
&s  the  difrerentiatioQ  of  what  is  the  same  in  similar  classes,  does 
not  depend  on  the  tlihi'g  itself,  but  is  man's  doing. 

It  is  by  instruction  that  living  beings  are  transformed.  Among 
tlie  Three  Muio  tribes3  some  were  houest,  some  disreputable.  Yao 
aud  Shun  made  them  all  alike  by  conferring  the  boon  of  instruction 
upon  them. 

Suppose  tl"'  men  of  Ch  u  and  Yfleh  *  to  settle  dou  u  in  Chiang 
or  Yil.s  Having  passed  there  months  and  years,  they  would  become 
pliant  and  yielding,  and  tlieir  customs  <'lmng,、d.  They  say  that  the 
people  of  67/*  arc  soft  and  sup[)le.  those  of  Ch  in  unsteady  and 
versatile,  of  C/tu  lively  and  passionate,  of  Yen n  dull  and  simple. 
No、v  let  us  suppose  that  people  of  the  four  States  alternately  went 
to  live  in  Chuaug  and  Yil  for  a  certain  time,  the  prolonged  stay  in 
a  place  remote  from  tlieir  country  would  undubitably  bring  about 
a  change  of  their  character. 

A  bad  natured  man's  heart  is  like  wood  or  stone,  but  even 
wood  aud  stor"'  can  be  used  by  men,  why  not  what  really  is 
neither  wood  nor  stone?    We  may  hope  that  it  will  still  be  able 


I  Six  kinds  of  horses  were  distinguished  in  the  .studs  of  the  ( 'hou  emperors, 
according  to  their  lieiglit.  Tihron  Li  (Chou  Li),  trad,  par  liiot,  Vol.  II,  p.  20*2. 

、 There  are  many  inyflis  illustrative  of  the  power  of  imisic.  II u  I 'a,  p|i , 
played  the  guitar,  so  that  the  fish  came  out  to  listen,  and  I'o  )  <i,  ^J^,  played 
the  lute  in  sucli  an  admirable  way,  tliat  tlie  horses  forgot  tlieir  fodder,  and  looked  up  to 
harken.  !hn~sf'ih-v'u"'h'"a'',  .juoted  l>y  the  P  H-urn-yun  fu  rliap.  1X5  under 仲不 

3  The  aborigines  of  China. 

' They  were  settled  in  modern  Ilukuany  and  (  hfkiatig. 

II  An  allusion  to  Mrnchi-»  Bk.  IU,  Pt.  II,  chap.  6,  where  the  diflbronce  of  the 
dialects  of  {.'hi  and  <  h  it  is  ]>ointcd  out.  Chuany  and  Vii  were  two  quarters  in  the 
capital  of  Ch  i. 

r'  The  Ch'i  State  was  in  northeni  SfM>、t""g，  Ch'in  in  Shenri,  and  Yen  in  Chili. 
The  characteristic  of  the  inhabitants  of  these  provinces  is  partly  still  true  to-day. 


Digitized  by  Google 


^80 


Lun-Hcng:  1).  Ktliic-al. 


to  understand  tlie  precepts  of  superior  men.  Only  in  the  case  of 
insanity,  when  a  person  sings  and  weeps  in  the  streets,  knowing 
neither  east  nor  west,  taking  no  heod  of  scorching  heat  or  humidity, 
unaware  of  bis  own  mad d ess  and  unconscious  of  hunger  and  satiety, 
nature  is  deranged  and  upset,  and  there  is  no  help.  As  such  a  man 
sees  nothing  before  him,  he  is  afraid  of  nothing. 

Therefore  the  government  does  not  abolish  the  officers  of 
public  instruction  or  dispense  with  criminal  judges,  wishing  thereby 
to  inculcate  the  observance  of  the  mural  laws.  The  schools  guide 
people  at  first,  the  laws  control  and  restrain  tbein  later  on. 

Even  the  will  of  a  Tan  C.hu  might  be  curbed  ；  the  proof  is 
that  tlie  soldiers  of  a  big  army  are  kept  in  order  by  reproofs. 
Men  and  officers  are  held  in  check  to  such  an  extent,  that  tliey 
look  at  death  as  a  return. 

Ho  Lul  put  his  soldiers  to  the  test  by  the  "Five  Lakes."5 
Th«*y  all  cut  their  arms  with  swords,  that  the  blood  trickled  down 
to  the  ground.  Kou  Chieii%  also  gave  his  men  a  trial  in  the  hall 
of  his  inner  palace.  Those  who  jumped  into  the  fire  and  perished, 
were  innumerable.  Human  nature  is  not  particularly  fond  of  swords 
and  fire,  but  the  two  rulers  had  such  a  power  over  their  men, 
that  they  did  not  care  for  their  lives.  It  is  the  effect  of  military 
discipline  to  make  light  of  cuts  and  blood. 

Mhig  PSti*  was  bold,  but  on  hearing  the  order  for  the  army 
he  became  afraid.  In  the  same  \yay  the  officers  who  were  wont 
to  draw  their  swords  to  fight  out,  whose  merits  were  first,  went 
through  all  the  ceremonial,  and  prostrated  themselves  (before  the 
emperor),  when  Shu  Sim  Tung6  liad  fixed  the  rites.  Imperious  and 
overbearing  first,  they  became  obedient  and  submissive.  The  power 
of  instruction  and  the  influence  of  virtue  transform  the  character. 
One  need  not  sorrow  that  a  character  is  bad,  but  it  is  to  be 
regretted,  if  it  does  not  submit  to  the  teachings  of  the  sages.  Such 
an  individual  owes  his  misfortune  to  liimself. 

Beans  and  wheat  are  different  from  rice  and  millet,  yet  their 
consumption  satisfies  the  appetite.    Are  the  natures  of  low  and 

1  King  of  the  Wu  State,  514-496  b.c. 

*  Another  name  of  the  T'ai-hu  lake  in  Kiangm,  which  consisted  of  five 
lakes,  or  five  «-unnected  sheets  of  water. 

1  The  ruler  of  the  i'iU/t  State,  4%  q.c,  who  overthrew  the  kingdom  of  Wu. 

*  A  hero  of  ciiortnoas  strength  in  the  Chou  epoch. 

r'  An  official  *>f  great  power  under  Han  Kao  7>"，  who  subdued  the  arrogance 
and  superciliousness  of  the  princes  and  nobles  by  the  ceremonial  they  were  made 
»o  undergo  at  an  audience  before  the  new  emperor.    Shi-chi  chap.  99,  p.  7、、 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Forming  of  Characters.  381 

superior  men  then  of  a  different  kind?  They  resemble  the  Five 
Grains,1  all  have  their  use.  There  is  no  fundamental  difference 
between  them,  only  their  manifestations  are  unlike.  The  fluid  men 
are  endowed  with,  is  either  copious  or  deficient,  and  their  character 
correspondingly  good  or  bad.  The  wicked  have  received  but  a 
small  dose  of  kindness,  the  irascible,  plenty  of  temper.  If  kindness 
be  unsufficieot,  people  do  wrong,  and  there  is  not  much  hope  for 
an  improvement.  With  plenty  of  temper,  people  become  violent, 
and  have  no  sense  of  justice.  Moreover,  their  feeling  of  sympathy 
is  defective,  joy  and  anger  do  not  happen  at  the  proper  time,  and 
they  have  baseless  and  irreasonable  fears.  Reckless  men  like  that 
commit  outrages,  therefore  they  are  considered  bad. 

Man  has  iu  his  body  the  Five  Qualities2  and  the  Five  Organs.3 
If  he  got  too  little  of  them,  or  if  they  are  too  small,  his  actions 
do  not  attain  to  goodness.4  Man  himself  is  either  accomplished 
or  deficient,  but  accoinplishuient  and  deficiency  do  not  mean  a  dif- 
ference of  organisation.  Use  leaven  in  big,  or  iu  small  quantities, 
and  the  result  will  be  similar.  In  rich  as  well  as  in  poor  wiue 
there  is  the  same  leaven.  Good  men  as  well  as  bad  ones  are 
permeated  by  the  same  original  fluid.  Accortliug  to  its  greater  or 
smaller  volumen  the  mind  of  the  individual  is  bright  or  dull. 

Hsi  Min  Pao  would  tighten  his  leathern  belt,  whenever  he 
wanted  to  relax  himself.  Tung  An  Yu  loosened  his  girdle  strings, 
when  he  was  goiug  to  rouse  himself.6  Yet  neither  passiou  nor 
indolence  is  the  right  medium.  However,  he  who  wears  a  belt  or 
a  girdle  on  his  body  is  properly  dressed.  Wlien  the  question 
arisen,  how  deficiencies  can  be  made  good  by  means  of  belts  and 
strings,  the  names  of  Hsi  Min  Pao  and  Tung  An  Yil  must  be  mentioned 
together.6 


1  Hemp,  millet,  rice,  wheat,  and  beans. 

， The  Five  Cardinal  Virtues :— benevolence,  justice,  propriety,  knowledge, 
and  truth. 

3  The  Iteart,  the  liver,  the  stomach,  tlie  lungs,  and  the  kidneys. 

*  Human  character,  to  wit  tlie  Five  Qualities,  depends  on  the  vulnincn  of  the 
original  fluid,  the  vital  foix-e,  which  shapes  the  Five  Organs.  According  they 
are  bigger  or  smaller,  tlie  nature  of  tlie  individual  is  din'erent.  This  idea  finds  ex- 
pression in  the  Chinese  language.  A  man  with  a  big  lieart, 《、 ，  is  generous 
and  liberal,  with  a  small  lieart,  、薄, mean.  The  fluid  of  the  stomach, 脾 氣, 
is  equivalent  to  anger. 

6  Cf.  p.  122. 

8  lit  both  cases  the  belt  or  girdle  is  the  same  indispensible  part  of  a  gentle - 
man's  toilet,  but  the  use  made  "f  it,  and  tlie  results  achieved,  are  quite  different. 
Tlie  tianie  may  be  said  of  humait  nature. 


382 


Lmi-H^ng:  D.  Ethical. 


Houses  of  poor,  wretched  people  are  not  in  a  proper  state. 
They  have  holes  in  the  walls  under  the  roof,  to  which  others  take 
objection.  Wlien  rich  and  wcll-to-ilo  people  build  houses,  they 
have  the  walls  made  in  a  way,  that  they  find  there  real  shelter. 
The  whole  house  is  in  good  repair,  and  nobody  could  say  anything 
against  it.1 

In  Wei2  the  land  was  divided  in  lots  of  a  hundred  "ww、  in 
Yeh3  alone  the  lots  measured  two  hundred  mow.  Hsi  M4n  Pao  ir- 
rigated his  land  with  water  from  the  Cluing 4  and  made  it  so  fertile, 
that  it  yielded  one  bushel 5  per  mow.  Man's  natural  parts  are  like 
the  fields  of  Yeh、  tuition  and  education,  like  the  water  from  the 
Chang.  One  must  be  sorry  for  him  that  cannot  be  transformed, 
but  not  for  a  man  whose  character  it  is  difficult  to  govero. 

In  the  streets  of  the  city  of  Loyang9  there  was  no  water.  It 
was  therefore  pulled  uj)  from  the  Lo  by  watermen.7  If  it  was 
streaming  quickly  day  and  night,  it  was  their  doing.  From  this 
point  of  view  kindness  and  justice  must  increase  manifold  in  bim 
who  comes  into  close  contact  with  an  excellent  man.8  Mencius' 
mother  changed  her  domicile,  for  she  had  ascertained  this  truth.9 

Water  amongst  men  is  dirty  and  muddy,  in  the  open  country 
it  is  clear  and  limpid.  It  is  all  the  same  water,  and  it  flows  from 
the  confines  of  Leaven :  its  dirtiness  and  limpidity  are  the  effects 
of  its  environments. 

Chao  T'o,  king  of  the  southern  YUeh,  was  originally  an  honour- 
able man  of  the  Han  State,10  but  he  took  to  the  habits  of  the 
southern  barbarians,  disregarded  the  imperial  commands,  dressed 
his  hair  in  a  tuft,  and  used  to  squat  down.    He  wa«  so  fond  of 

1  Human  nature  is  like  those  houses.    They  are  all  houses,  and  serve  the 
same  purpose,  but  some  are  in  good  repair,  others  in  a  wretched  state. 
3  An  ancient  State  in  North  f Ion  an  and  South  Chili. 
， The  modern  Chang-te-fu. 

*  A  large  tributary  of  the  river  Wei  in  Honan,  near  Chang-te-fu. 

1  A  Chung,  an  ancient  measure  equal  to  4  pecks  =  1  busliel,  as  some  say. 
According  to  others  it  would  be  as  macli  as  34  pecks. 

•  The  capital  of  the  Chou  dynasty  in  Ilonart,  the  modem  Honanfu. 
7  Probably  with  pump-works. 

»  The  excellent  man  is  like  the  river  Lo.  Streams  of  kindness  and  justice 
part  from  him. 

9  She  changed  her  domicile  for  the  purpose  of  saving  her  son  from  the  bad 
influences  of  the  neighboui  liood. 

10  Chao  To  went  to  Yueh,  modern  Kuang-tungt  as  genera]  of  Chin  Shih 
Huang  Ti,  and  subsequently  became  king  of  the  southern  barbarians,  whose  customs 
he  adopted.  Lu  Chia  was  sent  to  him  by  the  first  emperor  <»f  the  Han  dynasty  to 
receive  his  declaration  of  allegiance. 


gitized  by  Google 


The  Forming  of  Characters. 


this,  as  if  it  had  been  his  nature.  Lu  Chia  spoke  to  him  of  the 
virtues  of  the  Han,  and  impressed  him  with  their  holy  power,  so 
that  he  suddenly  rose  up,  and  felt  remorse.  He  received  the  com- 
mands of  his  sovereign,  and  communicated  them  to  tlie  savages. 
Against  liis  liair-dress  and  to  his  squatting  he  felt  something  like 
a  natural  repugnancy.  First  he  acted  in  the  aforesaid  manner, 
afterwards  thus.  It  shows  wliat  force  instruction  also  has,  and 
that  nature  is  not  the  only  factor. 


Digitized  by  Google 


384  Lun-Heng:  D.  Ethical. 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 
On  Original  Nature  (PM-hsing). 

Natural  feelings  and  natural  disposition  are  the  basis  of  human 
activity,  and  the  source  from  whicli  morals  aud  music  spring.  Mor- 
als impede,  and  music  checks  the  excesses  of  original  nature.  The 
natural  disposition  may  be  humble,  modest,  and  yielding.  The 
moral  laws  are  enforced  with  a  view  to  generalizing  such  praise- 
worthy qualities.  The  natural  feelings  may  be  good  or  had,  cheerful 
or  angry,  mournful  or  merry.  Music  is  made  in  order  to  make 
every  one  behave  respectfully.  What  morals  and  music  aim  at  are 
the  natural  feelings  and  natural  disposition. 

The  ancient  literati  and  scholars  who  have  written  essays 
have  all  touched  upon  this  question,  but  could  not  give  a  satisfactory 
answer.  The  philosopher  S/iUt  Tse '  of  the  Chou  time  held  that 
human  nature  is  partly  good  and  partly  bad,  that,  if  the  good 
nature  in  man  hv  cultivated  and  regulated,  his  goodness  increases, 
and  if  his  bad  uature  bo,  liia  badness  develops.  Thus  in  the  human 
heart  tliere  would  be  two  conflicting  principles,  and  good  aud  evil 
depend  on  cultivation.  Accordingly,  SItiA  Tse  composed  a  chapter 
on  cultivation. 

Fu  Tse  Chien„  L'fi'i  T'uto  K  ai,  and  Kung  Sun  Ni  Tse2  also  dis- 
cuss this  subject  in  very  much  the  same  way  as  Shih  Tae,  all  de- 
claring that  nature  is  partly  good,  partly  bad. 

Mfnchm  wrote  a  chapter  on  the  goodness  of  nature,3  contending 
that  all  men  are  originally  good,  and  that  the  bad  ones  are  cor- 
rupted by  the  world.  Men,  he  says,  are  created  by  heaven  and 
earth  ；  they  are  all  provided  with  a  good  nature,  but  when  they 
grow  up  and  come  into  contact  with  the  world,  they  run  wild, 

1  His  full  name  is  Shih  >A>".  He  was  one  of  the  seventy  disciples  of  Con- 
faciws  and  a  writer.  The  Catalogue  of  the  H<in-*hu  chap.  30  mentions  twenty-one 
chapters  of  his  pen.  Faher  in  his  Doctrines  of  ( 'onfuciwt  p.  29  states  that  the  title 
of  the  lost  work  of  Shih  Sh>-  was  "  yang-ithu 拔書， and  that  he  is  said  to  have 
been  a  disciple  of  Vh'i  Tiao  fC'ai,  whom  vide. 

*  Ail  disciples  of  Confucim,  wliose  writings  were  still  extant  during  the  Han 
dynasty,  hut  are  now  lost.  According  to  Liu  !  I  gin's  Catalogue  Fu  Tse  (liim  alias 
Fu  Pu  Ch  i  wrote  16  chapters,  (  hli  Tiao  K  ai  12,  and  Kung  Sun  M  7W  2S. 

， Metuius  Bk.  VI,  Pt.  I. 


Digitized  by  CjOO 


On  Original  Nature. 


385 


and  are  perverted,  and  their  wickedness  increases  daily.  According 
to  Meiwius  opinion,  man,  when  young,  would  bo  invariably  good. 

Wei  Tse、  said,  "I  have  formerly  remarked,  tliat  as  a  child 
the  prince  (Chou)  did  not  show  off." 

When  Chou  was  a  child,  Wei  7'w  observed  that  he  had  no 
good  character.  Inclined  to  evil,  lie  did  not  eclipse  the  common 
people,  and  when  he  had  grown  up,  he  caused  endless  revolutions. 
Therefore  Wei  Tse's  remark. 

When  Yang-Shi  ShVi-  Wo 2  was  born  and  Lady  Situ  saw  liim, 
and  upon  entering  the  hall  heard  him  cry,  she  went  bark  and  said, 
" His  voice  is  that  of  a  wolf.  He  lias  a  reckless  cliaractrr,  desti- 
tute of  all  affection.  But  for  him  the  Ynny  S/t^  family  would  not 
perisli."  Afterwards  slic  «lerlined  to  see  him.  When  lie  liad  grown 
up,  Ch  i  S/i^ng  made  a  rebellion,  in  which  ShiJi-  Wo  took  part. 
The  people  killed  him,  and  the  Yang  Sfi^  family  was  extinguislied 
thereby.3 

Chou 's  wickedness  dated  from  his  <,hil<llioo(l，  and  Sin-  H V/* 
rebellion  could  be  foretold  from  the  iio\v-born's  whine.  As  a  new- 
born child  has  not  yet  liad  any  intercourse  with  tlic  world,  who 
could  have  brought  about  his  perversion? 

Tan  Chu  was  born  in  Yads  palace,  and  Shmif/  C/iiin  in  S/mn's 
hall.  Under  the  reign  of  tliesc  two  sovereigns,  the  people  house 
by  house  were  worthy  of  being  entrusted  with  a  lief,  'l'liose  with 
whom  the  two  might  have  mixed,  were  most  excellent,  and  the 
persons  forming  the  suit  of  tlie  two  emperors,  were  all  most  vir- 
tuous. NevertheJess,  Tan  Chu  was  h;mghty,  and  Sl"my  ('him  brutal. 
Both  lacked  imperial  decorum  to  such  a  dt'^ree,  that  tlicy  were 
set  up  as  a  warning  to  coming  generations. 

Mencim  judges  men  by  the  pupils  of  their  eves.  If  the  heart 
be  bright,  says  he,  the  pupils  are  clear,  if  it  be  dark,  the  pupiln 
are  dim.*  However,  the  clearness  and  dimuess  of  the  oye«  readies 
back  to  as  far  as  mans  birth.  These  diffpronces  are  due  to  tlie 
different  fluids  received  from  heaven.  The  eyes  an*  not  clear  during 
childhood,  or  dimmed,  when  man  grows,  and  associates  with  other 
people.    Nature  at  first  is  spontaneous,  goodness  and  badness  are 


1  The  Viscount  of  Wei,  a  kinsman  of  prince  ( 'hou  i.  e.  Chou  Hsin,  the  last 
emperor  of  the  Shany  dynasty,  who  lost  the  throne  through  his  wickedness  and 
tyrany  (1154-1122  b.c.)- 

*  The  Yang  Shf  family  w:w  very  powerful  in  tlie  Chin  State.  Lady  Shu  had 
married  one  】''<wy  Sfv，  and  was  thus  related  to  Yang-Sh^  Shih-Wo. 

»  This  took  place  in  tlie  Chin  State  in  513  b.c. 

*  Mencius  Bk.  IV,  Pt.  I,  ch»p.  XV. 

I-u»  -  Hrng.  2S 


igitized  by  Google 


38G 


Lan  -  H^ng :  D.  Ethical. 


the  outcome  of  different  dispositions.  What  Menciu^  says  about 
original  nature  is  not  true. 

Yet  something  may  have  contributed  to  the  idea  of  the  good- 
ness of  nature.  A  man  may  be  benevolent  or  just,  it  is  the  wonder- 
Ail  proficiency  of  his  nature,  as  in  his  locomotion  and  movements 
he  shows  his  extraordinary  natural  ability.  But  his  colour,  whether 
white  or  black,  and  his  stature,  whetlier  long  or  short,  remain  un- 
changed until  old  age  and  final  death.   Sucli  is  his  heavenly  nature. 1 

Everybody  knows  that  water,  earth,  and  other  substances 
difler  in  their  natures,  but  people  are  not  aware  that  good  and 
evil  are  due  to  different  natural  dispositions.  A  one  year  old  baby 
is  not  inclined  to  violent  robbery.  After  it  has  grown  up,  its 
grew!  may  gradually  develop,  and  lead  to  ferocity  and  aggressiveness. 

Koo  Tm,  a  contemporary  of  Mencius  denies  the  difference  of 
goodness  and  badness  in  nature,  comparing  it  to  flowing  water 
which  led  to  the  east,  runs  eastward,  and  to  the  west,  westward. 
As  water  canuot  be  divided  according  to  its  eastern  or  western 
direction,  a  division  of  men  into  good  and  bad  ones  is  untenable.2 
Therefore  Kao  Tse  asserts  that  human  nature  is  similar  to  the 
nature  of  water.  Such  being  tlie  case,  water  may  well  be  used  as 
an  illustration. 

Nature  is  as  metal  is  metal,  and  wood,  wood.  A  good  man 
has  a  natural  bent  towards  goodnejis,  and  a  wicked  man  to  wicked- 
ness. Man  is  endowed  by  heaven  with  a  spontaneous  miud,  and 
lias  received  a  uniform  disposition."  Therefore  portents  appear  at 
the  time  of  birth,  from  which  man's  goodness  and  badness  can  be 
discovered. 

People  with  whom  no  difference  of  good  and  bad  exists,  and 
wlio  may  be  pushed  one  or  the  other  way,  are  called  average 
people.  Being  neither  good  nor  bad,  they  require  instruction  iu 
order  to  assume  a  certain  type.  Therefore  Co"f"cius  says  that  with 
people  above  tl)«  average  oue  (，ao  discourse  on  higher  subjects,  but 
that  with  those  under  the  average  one  cannot  do  so.4  Kao  Tse's 
comparison  with  ohaiincllcd  water  applies  only  to  average  people, 
but  does  nof  concern  extremely  good  or  extremely  bad  persons. 


1  The  spiritual  nature  limy  be  transformed,  but  not  the  pliysica)  one.  Human 
nature  is  so  wonderful,  that  even  origfiially  bad  people  may  by  mucli  training  be- 
come benevolent  and  just.  Mmchui  seeing  these  wonderful  results  was  misled  into 
the  belief  that  liuniati  nature  was  originally  good. 

2  Mencius  Bk.  VI,  Pt.  I,  cl.ap.  II. 

*  Either  good  or  had,  nof  partly  good  and  partly  had. 

*  AnaUc^  II, 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Original  Nature.  387 

According  to  Confucius  people  are  nearly  related  to  one  another  by 
character,  but  become  very  different  by  habit.1  The  character  of 
average  people  is  the  work  of  habit.  Made  tainiliar  with  good, 
they  turn  out  good,  accustomed  to  evil,  they  become  wicked.  Only 
with  extremely  good,  or  extremely  bad  characters  habit  is  of  no 
avail.  Therefore  Confucius  holds  that  only  highly  cultured  and 
grossly  ignorant  people  cannot  be  cliauged.2  Their  natures  being 
either  good  or  otherwise,  the  influence  of  sages,  and  the  teaching 
of  wise  men  is  impotent  to  work  a  change.  Since  Co"f"('"is,  the 
Nestor  in  wisdom  and  virtue,  and  the  most  eminent  of  all  philo- 
sophers, asserts  the  unchangeability  of  highly  cultured  and  grossly 
ignorant  people,  we  may  conclude  that  Kao  Tse's  sayings  are  not 
correct. 

However,  there  is  some  foundation  for  Kao  Tse  s  view.  The 
Shiking1  says: ― "  What  can  that  admirable  man  be  compared  to?" 
The  Tso-chuan  answers ： ― "  He  is  like  boiled  silk;  dyed  with  indigo 
it  becomea  blue,  coloured  with  vermilion  it  turns  crimson."  Leading 
water  eastward  or  westward  is  like  dyeing  silk  blue  or  red.  Tan 
Chu  and  Shang  ChUn  were  also  imbued  with  Yai>  and  S/iun's  doc- 
trines, but  Tan  C/iu  remained  haughty,  and  Sltang  Chan  cruel.  The. 
extremely  bad  stuff  they  were  made  of  did  not  take  tlie  blue  or 
the  red  colour. 

In  opposition  to  Meucius,  Sun  C/iing*  wrote  a  chapter  on  the 
wickedness  of  nature,  supposing  human  nature  to  be  wicked,  and 
its  goodness  to  be  ficticious.  Wickedness  of  nature  means  to  say 
that  men,  when  they  are  born,  have  all  a  bad  nature,  and  ficti- 
ciousness  that,  after  they  have  grown  up,  they  are  forcibly  induced 
to  do  good.  According  to  this  view  of  Sun  Chiug,  among  men.  even 
as  children,  there  are  no  good  ones. 

Chi  as  a  boy  amused  himself  with  planting  trees.  When  Con- 
fucim  could  walk,  he  played  with  sacrificial  vessels.  When  a  stone 
is  produced,  it  h  hard,  when  a  fragrant  flower  comes  forth,  it 
smells.  All  things  imbued  with  a  g(，o<l  fluid  develop  accordingly 
with  their  growth.    He  who  amused  himsclt'  with  tree  planting, 


1  AnaUcU  XVII,  2. 
8  AnaUcU  XVII,  3. 

， Shikinff  I,  Bk.  IV,  Ode  IX,  2.   Vid.  above  p.  374. 

*  One  of  the  Ten  Philosophers,  whose  work  lias  come  down  to  us.  He 
lived  in  the  3rd  cent.  b.c.  His  original  surname  Hsun  ―  hence  //.*«n  T*e  ― 荀 
was  changed  into  Sun  under  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  H*i'tan  Ti  of  the  Han 
dynasty,  73  48  b.c,  wlio.se  personal  name  was  //Win.  Cf.  Kdkiw,  *'  Stun  Kiny  the 
Philosopher  "  in  Journal  of  the  Koyal  Asiatic  Sonety,  Shanghai  Vol.  XXXIII,  p.  1(3. 

•i6* 


gitized  by  Google 


388 


Lun-Heng:  D.  Ethical. 


became  the  minister  of  T'anff,1  and  the  boy  who  played  with 
sacrificial  vessels,  the  sage  of  Chou.  Things  with  a  fragrant  or 
stony  nature  sliow  their  hardness  and  fragrance.  Sim  Ching's 
opinion  is,  therefore,  incompatible  with  truth,  yet  his  belief  in  the 
wickedness  of  nature  is  not  quite  without  foundatiou: 

A  one  year  old  baby  lias  no  yielding  disposition.  Seeing 
something  to  eat,  it  cries,  aud  wants  to  eat  it,  and  beholding  a 
nice  thing,  it  weeps,  and  wants  to  play  with  it.  After  it  lias 
grown  up,  its  propensities  are  checked,  and  its  wishes  cut  down, 
and  it  is  compelled  to  do  good. 

Liu  1st  Cl^ng^  objects  that,  in  tin's  case  lieaven  would  have 
no  fluid.  Whore  would  tlie  first  good  deed  come  from,  if  the  Yang 
and  the  Yin  principles  and  good  and  evil  were  not  counterbalancing 
eacli  other? 

Ltt  Cliia3  says  that,  when  heaven  and  earth  create  men,  tlu»y 
predispose  the 出 in  favour  of  propriety  and  justice,  that  man  can 
see  what  for  lie  lias  received  life  and  act  accordingly,  which  ac- 
cordance is  railed  virtue.  Lu  67/ wi  thinks  that  the  human  mind 
is  turned  towards  propriety  and  justice,  and  that  man  also  can  dis- 
cover what  for  he  has  come  into  Hie.  However,  the  right-minded 
do  good  of  tl)oir  own  ； word  without  waiting  for  tliis  discovery, 
and  tlie  evil-min'k'(l  disregard  propriety  and  defy  justice,  although 
they  see  (juitf  clearly  in  tlie  matter.  It  is  impossible  tliat  justice 
should  win  them  to  the  good  cause.  Tlius  the  covetous  can  speak 
very  well  on  (lisinterostodnpss,  and  tlie  rebels  on  good  government, 
robber  condcins  tliei't  and  Chwnnj  Chian 5  stigmatises  lawless- 

ness. They  have  a  clear  conception  of  tliemselves,  and  know  how 
to  talk  on  virtue,  but  owing  to  their  vicious  character  they  do  not 
practise  what  tliey  say,  and  tin*  good  cause  derives  no  benefit  from 
it.    Tli  ere  fort*  Lu  Chins  opinion  cannot  be  coDsidered  the  right  one. 

Tung  Chung  S/iun  having  read  Mencim  and  Sun  Ching  s  writings, 
composed  liimsell'  an  e«say  on  natural  feelings  and  natural  dis- 


1   Vi>.  of  】-"o  who  reigned  at  T'ung,  in  (  hili. 

a  A  famous  author,  more  generally  known  by  the  name  Liu  Hnang,  80-9  b.c, 
whose  works  we  still  possess. 

， A  politician  and  scholar  of  the  3rd  and  2nd  cent,  b.c,  author  of  the  "  New 
Words " 新― p:d，  tlie  same  as  nientioried  above  p.  383  as  envoy  to  the  king  of  Ujc 
southern  Yiieh. 

*  Cf.  p.  139. 

6  Another  outlaw, 

6  An  author  of  the  2nd  cent,  b.c.  who  wrote  the  "  Dew  of  the  Spring  and 
Autumn  "   ^ 秋 ^  '银 which  is  still  extant. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Original  Nature. 


389 


position,  in  whicli  he  says:— Heaven's  great  principles  are  on  one 
side  tlie  Yin,  on  the  other  the  Yang.  The  groat  priud])les  in  man 
are  on  one  side  the  natural  feelings,  on  the  otlicr  natural  disposition. 
The  disposition  comes  out  of  the  Yang,  the  feelings  out  of  the  Yin. 
The  Yin  fluid  is  base,  the  Yang  fluid  humane.  Who  believes  in  the 
goodness  of  nature  sees  the  Yang,  who  speaks  of  its  wickedness 
the  Yin.  That  is,  Tung  Chung  Shu  means  to  say  that  Mencius  saw- 
only  the  Yang,  and  Sun  Chiug  the  Yin. 

The  opinions  of  the  two  philosophers  may  well  thus  be 
distinguished,  but  as  regards  human  nature,  such  a  distinction  does 
not  hold  good.  Goodness  and  badness  are  not  divided  in  this  way. 
Natural  feelings  and  natural  disposition  are  simultaneously  produced 
by  the  Fin  and  the  Yang  combined,  eitlier  more  or  less  copiously. 
Precious  stones  growing  in  rocks  are  partly  of  a  single  colour, 
partly  multicoloured,  how  can  natural  feelings  or  natural  disposition 
growing  in  the  Yin  and  Yang  be  either  exclusively  good?  What 
Tung  Chung  Sim  says  is  not  correct. 

Liu  Tse  Citing  teaches  that  the  natural  disposition  is  formed 
at  birth,  that  it  is  inherent  to  the  body  and  does  not  come  out, 
that  on  tlie  other  }mnd  natural  feelings  arise  from  the  contact  witli 
the  world,  and  manifest  themselves  outwardly.  That  winch  mani- 
fests itself  outwardly,  he  calls  Ynng.  tliat  wliicli  does  not  appear, 
he  calls  Yin  Thus  Liu  Tse  Vhhig  submits  that  tin*  natural  dis- 
position is  inherent  to  the  body,  but  does  not  conifi  out,  whereas 
the  natural  feelings  unite  with  external  things,  and  appear  out- 
wardly. Therelbn*  ho  designates  them  as  Yang.  The  natural  dis- 
position lie  designates  as  Yin,  because  it  does  not  aj)[>ear,  and  has 
no  communication  with  the  ()ut'、r  world.  Li"  T<e  Cheng's  identifica- 
tion of  natural  feelings  with  Yang  and  disposition  with  Yin  leaves 
the  origin  of  tlu*se  qualities  quite  out  of  the  question,  insomuch 
as  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  are  determined  in  an  off-hand  way  by 
outward  manifestation  und  non-appearanco.  If  the  Yang  really 
depends  on  outward  manifestation,  then  it  may  be  said  tliat  na- 
tural disposition  also  coim's  into  contact  with  extorual  tilings.  "In 
moments  of  haste,  he  clcsives  to  it,  ami  in  sca.sons  of  danger  he 
cleaves  to  it." 1  Tlie  compassionate:  cannot  endure  tlie  sight  of 
sufferin'r.  This  non-ciKluranrc  is  an  efllucnce  of  beiu'volence.  Hu- 
inility  aud  nnxlfsty  are  inaiiifcstations  of  natural  disposition.  These 
qualities  have  all  thoir  external  objects.    As  compassion  and  mod- 

1  A  qitotation  from  AnaUvts  IV,  5,  wlicre  wc  read  that  ilio  superior  man  al- 
ways cleaves  to  l>enc\olcrico. 


Digitized  by  Google 


390 


Luii-Hcng:  D.  Ethical. 


esty  manifest  tliemselves  outwardly,  1  am  afraid  that  tlic  assertion 
that  natural  disposition  is  sometliitig  inside  witliout  any  connection 
with  external  things,  cannot  be  right.  By  taking  into  consideration 
merely  outwardness  and  inwardness,  Yin  and  Yang,  without  refer- 
ence to  the  goodness  and  badness  of  nature,  the  truth  cannot  be 
known.  As  Liu  Tse  Clihig  lias  it,  natural  disposition  would  be  Yin, 
and  natural  feelings  Ytwg^  but  have  men  not  good  as  well  as  bad 
passions? 

From  Mencius  down  to  Liu  Tse  CUny  the  profoundest  scholars 
and  greatest  thinlicrs  have  propounded  a  great  many  different  views 
without,  however,  solving  the  problem  of  original  nature  in  a  satis- 
factory way.  The  arguments  of  the  philosophers  SliiJi  Tse,  hung 
Sun  At  Tse,  and  others  of  the  same  class 1  alone  (！ on  tain  much  truth. 
We  may  say  that  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  subject,  but  the* 
difficulty  ia  to  explain  the  principle.  Style  and  diction  may  be 
ever  so  brilliant  and  tlowery,-  and  the  conceptions  and  arguments 
as  sweet  as  honey,  all  that  is  no  proof  of  their  truth. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  huinnn  natural  disposition  is  sometimes 
good,  and  soinptiincs  bad,  just  as  human  faculties  can  be  of  a 
high  or  of  a  low  ordor.  Iligli  ones  cannot  be  low,  nor  low  ones 
high.  To  say  tliat  hu man  nature  is  neither  good  nor  bad  would 
be  the  same  as  to  maintain  that  human  faculties  are  neither  ltigli 
nor  low.  The  original  disposition  which  Heaven  gives  to  men,  and 
the  drstiiiy  wliicli  it  sonds  down,  are  essentially  alike.  Iiy  destiny 
men  art"  honou red  or  despised,  by  nature  good  or  had.  If  one 
disputes  the  existence  of  goodness  and  ba<lncss  in  human  natun*. 
lie  might  as  well  rail  in  question  that  destiny  makes  men  great 
or  misorable. 

Tlie  nature  of  tlie  soil  of  the  Nino  Provinces3  is  different  in 
regard  to  goodness  and  badness.  It  is  yellow,  red,  or  black,  of 
superior,  average,  or  inferior  (juality.  The  water  courses  are  not 
all  alike.  Thev  arc  liinpid  or  muddy,  ami  run  east,  west,  north 
or  southward.  Man  is  endowed  with  the  nature  of  Heaven  and 
Earth,  and  imbue<l  with  the  spirit  of  the  Five  Qualities.4    He  may 

1  Who  maintain  that  human  nature  is  partly  good  and  partly  bad. 

3  The  text  ha.s  §|$ 文茂 § 已 which  looks  like  a  name:— the  Record  of 
F''"g  Wrn  Mao.  The  fact,  however,  that  a  philosopher  of  the  name  of  Frng  Wi'n 
Mao  is  unknown,  and  the  symmetry  of  the  context  leads  me  to  the  condusiou  that 
instead  of        wc  should  read  H^-  and  translate,  as  I  have  done. 

s  In  preliistorir  times  China  was  divided  into  nine  provinces,  hence  the  term 
the  Nine  Provinces  lins  become  a  synonvm  of  China. 

*  Cf.  p.  381  Note  2. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Original  Nature. 


:v.n 


be  benevolent  or  just,  it  is  the  wondorful  proficiejicy  of  his  nature. 
In  his  locomotion  and  movements  he  may  be  majestic  or  agile,  it 
is  his  extraordinary  natural  ability.  But  liis  colour,  whether  white 
or  black  and  liis  stature,  wlicther  long  or  sliort,  remain  unchanged 
until  old  age  and  final  death.    Such  is  heavenly  nature.1 

1  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that  wliat  Meiicim  says  on  the 
goodness  of  human  nature,  refers  to  people  above  the  average, 
that  what  S'-n  Citing  says  on  its  badness,  refers  to  people  under 
the  average,  and  that,  if  Ynng  1 1  stung  tea^lies  that  in  human  nature 
goodness  and  badness  are  mixed  together,  he  means  average  people. 
Bringing  people  back  to  the  unchanging  standard  and  leading  them 
into  the  right  way,  one  may  teaoli  them.  But  this  teaching  alone 
does  not  exhaust  human  nature. 

1  The  last  sentences  are  repeated  from  p.  386. 


Digitized  by  Google 


302 


Lwn-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 
Criticisms  on  Confiicius  (Wen  K'ung). 

The  students  of  Confucianism  of  the  present  day  like  to  swear 
in  verba  mayistri,  and  to  believe  in  antiquity.  The  words  of  the 
Worthies  and  Sages  are  to  them  infallible,  and  they  do  their  best 
to  explain  and  practise  them,  but  they  are  unable  to  criticize  them. 
When  the  Worthies  and  Sages  take  the  pencil,  and  commit  their 
thoughts  to  writing,  though  they  moditate,  and  thoroughly  discuss 
their  subject,  one  cannot  say  that  they  always  hit  the  truth,  and 
mucli  less  can  their  occasional  utterances  all  be  true.  But  although 
they  cannot  be  all  true,  tlie  scholars  of  to-day  do  not  know,  how- 
to  impugn  them,  and.  in  case  they  are  true,  but  su  abstruse  that 
they  are  difficult  to  understand,  those  people  Jo  not  know  how  to 
interpret  tlieir  meaning.  Tlie  words  of  the  Sages  on  various  oc- 
casions are  often  contradictory,  and  their  writings  at  dill'erent  tiraea 
very  often  mutually  clash.  That  however  is,  what  the  scholars  of 
our  time  do  not  understand. 

One  always  hears  the  remark  that  the  talents  of  the  Seventy 
Discijdt's  of  the  school  of  Confucius  surpassetl  those  of  the  savants 
of  our  days.  Tliis  statonieiit  is  erroneous.  They  imagine  that  Con- 
fucius acting  as  teaclier,  a  Sage  propounding  tlie  doctrine,  must 
have  imparted  it  to  exceptionally  gifted  men,  whence  the  idea  that 
tlicy  woyv  quite  unique.  The  talents  of  the  ancients  are  the  talents 
of  the  moderns.  Wliat  we  call  men  of  supfrior  genius  now-a-days, 
wore  regarded  l>y  the  ancients  Sages  and  supernatural  beings, 
hence  the  belief  that  the  Seventy  Sage»  could  not  appear  in  otlier 
generations. 

If  at  pros* 'tit  tliero  could  be  a  teacln'r  like  Confucius,  the 
sfliolars  of  this  ngc  would  all  be  like  Yen  aud  Min,1  and  without 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


Confucius,  the  Seventy  Disciples  would  be  only  like  the  Literati  of 
the  present  day.  For  though  learning  from  Confucim,  tliey  could 
not  thoroughly  inquire.  The  words  of  the  Sage  they  did  not 
completely  understand,  bis  doctrines  and  principles  they  were 
unable  to  explain.  Therefore  tliey  ought  to  have  asked  to  get 
a  clearer  conception,  and  uot  understanding  thoroughly,  they 
ought  to  have  raised  objections  in  order  to  come  to  a  complete 
understanding. 

The  sentiments  which  Kao  Yao9  uttered  before  the  Emperor 
Shun  were  shallow  and  superficial,  and  not  to  tlie  point.  Yu  asked 
him  to  explain  himself,  when  the  shallow  words  became  deeper, 
and  the  superficial  hints  more  explicit,3  for  criticisms  animate  the 
discussion,  and  bring  out  tlie  meaning,  and  opposition  leads  to 
greater  clearness. 

Confucius  ridiculed  the  guitar-playing  and  singing  of  Tse  1m,4 
who,  however,  retorted  by  quoting  what  Confucius  had  said  on  a 
previous  occasion.  If  we  now  take  up  the  text  of  the  AnalecU, 
we  shall  see  that  in  the  sayings  of  Con/ucitis  there  is  much  like 
the  strictures  on  the  singing  of  Tse  Yu.  But  there  were  few  dis- 
ciples able  to  raise  a  question  like  Tse  Yu.  In  consequence  tlie 
words  of  Confucius  became  stereotyped  and  inexplicable,  because 
the  Seventy  could  not  make  any  objection,  and  the  scholars  of 
the  present  time  are  not  in  a  position  to  judge  of  the  truth  of 
the  doctrine. 

Their  scientific  methods  do  not  arise  from  a  lack  of  ability, 
but  the  difficulty  consists  in  opposing  the  teacher,  scrutinizing  his 
doctrine,  investigating  its  meaning,  and  bringing  evidence  to  ascer- 
tain right  and  wrong.  Criticism  is  not  solely  permitted  vh-a-ris  to 
sages,  as  long  as  tliey  are  alive.  The  cotninentators  of  the  present 
day  do  not  require  the  instruction  of  a  sago,  before  they  dare  to 
speak. 

If  questions  be  asked  on  tilings  which  seem  inexplicable,  and 
Confucius  be  pressed  hard,  liow  can  this  be  tlet»ined  a  violation  of 
the  moral  laws,  and  if  those  who  really  are  able  to  hand  clown 
the  holy  teachings,  impugn  the  words  of  Confucim,  why  must  their 
undertaking  be  considered  unreasonable?  I  trust  that,  as  regards 


1  Yen  Hui  and  Min  Ttt  <  'h'ien,  two  prominent  disci|>1os  of  Confuchu. 

a  The  minister  of  Shun. 

3  Tlie  discussions  "f  (he  two  wise  men  before  Shun  arc  to  be  found  in  the 

Shuking.  Kao  Yao 

*  Cf.  AvaUds  XVII,  4. 


Digitized  by  Google 


394  Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 

those  inquiries  into  the  words  of  Con/ucius  and  tlioso  remarks  on 
his  unintelligible  passages,  men  of  genius  of  all  ages,  possessing 
tlie  natural  gift  of  answering  questions  and  solving  difficulties, 
will  certainly  appreciate  tlie  criticisms  and  investigations  made  in 
our  time. 


" M^ny  I  Tse 1  asked,  what  filial  pirty  was.  The  Master  said, 
4  To  show  no  disregard.'  Soon  after,  as  Fan  ChiJi 2  、vas  driving 
him,  the  Master  told  him  saying,  "  Mhig  Sun 3  asked  me,  what  filial 
piety  was,  and  1  answered  him,  4  To  show  no  disregard.' " 

Fan  Chili  said,  '  What  does  that  mean?'  The  Master  re- 
plied, ' That  parents,  while  alive,  should  be  served  according  to 
propriety  ；  that,  when  dead,  they  should  be  buried  according  to 
propriety;  and  that  they  should  be  sacrificed  to  according  to  pro- 
prit'ty.'  ，'4 

Now  I  ask,  Confucius  said  tliat  no  disregard  is  to  be  shown 
viz.  no  disregard  to  propriety.  But  a  good  son  also  must  anticipate 
his  parents'  thoughts,  conform  to  their  will,  and  never  disregard  their 
tcis/ies.  Confucius  .said  "  to  show  no  disregard,"  but  did  not  speak 
of  disregard  for  propriety.  Could  M^ug  I  Tse,  hearing  the  words 
of  Confuctm,  not  imagine  that  he  meant  to  say,  "  no  disregard  for 
(the  parents)  wishes?  "  When  Fan  ChiJi  came,  lie  asked,  what  it 
meant.  Then  Con/ucius  said,  "  That  parents  whilo  alive  should  be 
served  according  to  propriety;  that,  when  dead,  they  should  b« 
buried  according  to  propriety;  and  that  tliey  should  be  sacrificed 
to  according  to  propriety  "  Had  Fcui  C/iih  not  inquired,  what  tlie 
words  "  no  disregard  "  meant,  he  would  not  have  understood  them. 

M4ng  I  Tse 's  talents  did  uot  surpass  those  of  Fan  (M、  there- 
fore there  is  no  record  of  his  sayings  or  doings  in  the  chapters 
of  the  Analects.  Since  Fan  C/iih  could  not  catch  the  meaning,  would 
Ming  I  Tse  have  doue  so? 

.Wng  Wu  l\)  asked  what  filial  piety  was.  The  Master  replied 
" It*  tlie  only  sorrow  parents  have,  is  that  which  they  feel,  when 
their  children  are  sick."5 


1  M'^if/  I  Tse  waa  the  chief  of  one  of  three  powerful  families  in  Lu. 
- A  disciple  of  ( 'onfuciim. 

3  I.  e.  Mrng  I  7>. 

4  AnakcUs  II,  5.— Tlie  citations  from  the  AnalecU  are  quoted  from  Legg" 
translation,  but  here  and  tliere  modified  »o  ns  to  suit  the  text,  for  Wang  Ch'wff 
oOcn  understands  ;i  passage  quite  differently  from  Leggt  and  his  authorities. 

Analects  II，  6. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


Wu  Po  used  to  (iause  his  parents  muoh  sorrow,  therefore 
( 'onfucius  spoke  the  afore-mentioned  words.  M^ng  Wu  Vo  was  a 
cause  of  sorrow  to  his  parents,  whereas  Mhuj  I  T、e  disregarded 
propriety.  If  in  reproving  this  fault  Con/ttchts  replied  to  M4n<j  Wu 
Vo  "  If  tlie  only  sorrow  parents  have  is  tliat  which  they  feel,  when 
their  cliildron  are  sick,"  lie  ought  to  have  told  Mmg  I  Tie  that 
only  in  case  of  fire  or  inundation  might  propriety  he  neglected. 

Chou  Kung  says  that  small  talents  require  tliorougli  instruc- 
tions, wliereas  for  great  ones  a  liint  is  sufficient.  Tse  Yu  possessed 
great  talents,  yet  with  liim  Omfudus  went  into  details.  The  talents 
of  Mhtg  I  Tse  were  comparatively  small,  but  Confticiiui  gave  liim  a 
mere  hint.  Thus  he  did  not  fall  in  with  Chou  Kung, s  views.  Re- 
proving the  shortcomings  of  MMg  I  Tse,  he  lost  tl»e  right  principle. 
How  was  it  that  none  of  his  disciples  took  exception? 

If  lie  did  not  dare  to  speak  too  openly  owing  to  the  high 
position  held  by  M4ng  I  Tse,  lie  likewise  ought  to  have  said  to 
Ming  Wu  Po  nothing  more  than  '  not  to  cause  sorrow  (is  filial  piety),' 
for  both  were  scions  of  the  Mmg  family,  and  of  etjual  dignity. 
There  is  no  apparent  reason,  why  lie  should  have  spoken  to  AUng 
Wu  Po  in  clear  terms  and  to  \Ung  I  Tse  thus  vaguely.  Had  Con- 
fucius freely  told  Mhig  /  Tse  not  to  disregard  propriety,  what  harm 
would  there  liave  been  ？ 

No  other  family  was  more  powerful  in  Lu  than  the  Chi 
family,  yet  ( 'onfucius  blamed  them  for  having  eight  rows  of  panto- 
mimes in  their  court,1  and  objected  to  their  performing  a  sacrifice 
on  Mount  l^ni.'1  He  was  not  afraid  of  tlie  evil  consequences,  which 
this  lack  of  reserve  in  regard  to  the  usurpation  of  territorial  rights 
by  the  Chi  family  might  have  lor  liim,  but  anticipated  bad  results 
from  a  straightforward  answer  given  to  Meng  I  Tse?  Moreover, 
he  was  questioned  about  filial  piety  more  than  once,  and  he  had 
always  liis  charioteer  at  hand.3  When  he  spoke  to  MMg  I  Tse、 
lie  was  not  merely  in  a  submissive  mood,4  1 1  kmc  fore  lie  informed 
Fan  ChUi. 


Confttcius  said 5  "  Kiclies  and  honour  are  what  men  desire.  Lf 
they  cannot  be  obtained  in  the  proper  way,  tliey  should  not  be 

I  AnaUct*  III,  1. 

a  Analtctx  III,  6.    This  sacrifice  was  a  privilege  of  tlio  sovereign. 
， So  that  lie  might  liavc  used  him  as  his  mouth-piece  ah  in  the  case  of 
Mtng  I  k 

4  He  was  not  afraid  of  Mnxg  I  Tse. 
6  Analects  IV,  5. 


Digitized  by  Google 


30(； 


Lun-Hing:  E.  Critique. 


held.  Poverty  and  meanness  are  what  men  dislike.  If  they  cinnot 
be  obtained  in  the  proper  way,  they  should  not  be  avoided."  1 

Tlie  meaning  is  tliat  men  must  acquire  riches  in  a  just  ami 
proper  way,  and  not  take  them  indiscriminately,  that  they  must 
keep  within  their  bounds,  patiently  endure  poverty,  and  not  reck- 
lessly throw  it  off.  To  say  that  riches  and  honour  must  not  be 
lield,  unless  tliey  are  obtained  in  the  proper  way,  is  all  right,  but 
what  is  poverty  and  mcauness  not  obtained  iu  a  proper  way  ？ 
Wealth  and  honour  can,  of  course,  be  abandoned,  but  what  is  the 
result  of  giving  up  poverty  and  meanness?  By  giving  up  poverty 
and  meanness  one  obtains  wealth  and  honour.  As  long  as  one 
does  riot  obtain  wealth  and  honour,  one  does  not  get  rid  of  pov- 
erty and  meanness.  If  we  say  that,  unless  wealth  and  honour 
can  be  obtained  iu  a  proper  way,  poverty  anil  meanness  should 
not  be  shunned,  then  that  which  is  obtained  is  wealth  and  honour, 
not  poverty  and  meanness.  How  can  the  word  "  obtaining  ，，  be 
used  with  reference  to  poverty  and  meanness?  Therefore  the  pas- 
sage ought  to  read  as  follows: 

" Poverty  and  meanness  are  what  people  dislike.  If  thvy  can- 
not be  avoided  in  the  proper  way,  they  should  not  be  avoided." 

Avoiding  is  the  proper  word,  not  obtaining.  Obtaining  is 
used  of  obtaining.  Now  there  is  avoiding,  liow  can  it  be  called 
obtaining?  Only  in  regard  to  riches  and  honour  we  can  speak  of 
obtaining.  How  so?  By  obtaining  riches  and  honour  one  avoids 
poverty  and  meanness.  Then  how  can  poverty  and  meanness  be 
avoided  in  the  proper  way? --By  purifying  tliemselves  and  keeping 
in  the  proper  way  officials  acquire  rank  and  emoluments,  wealth 
and  honour,  and  by  obtaining  these  they  avoid  poverty  and  moannt'ss. 

How  arc  poverty  and  meanness  avoided  not  in  the  proper 
way? -一 If  anybody  feels  so  vexed  and  annoyed  with  poverty  and 
meanness,  tliat  lie  has  recourse  to  brigandage  and  robbery  for 
the  purpose  of  ania.ssing  money  and  valuables,  and  usurps  official 
einolumenfs.  tlicn  he  does  not  keep  in  the  proper  way. 

Siiiot'  tlio  SovtMity  Disciplt's  did  not  ask  any  ijucstion  rt'ganling 
the  passage  under  discussion,  tlie  litem of  to-day  are  likewise 
inca[)al>lc  of  raising  any  o})jection. 

If  tlut  moaninn;  of  this  utterance  is  not  cx)>l«iino(l,  nor  the 
words  made  clear,  、、- 1*  would  have  to  say  that  Confucius  could  not 

1  Wang  (  hung  thus  interprets  I  lie  passage,  wliicli  gives  no  sense.  I  should 
say  that  he  misunderstood  (  onfucim,  for  every  difficulty  is  removed,  if  we  take  the 
words  Id  ni(«;in  wli.it  Lfijije  transl;il«.s  ：  -  •*  if  //  cannot  be  «»l)tained  "  ri*?.  "  if  it  is  not 
p'wihle  lo  an  in  ilie  ai'i.rt'.、;i:(l  iiiaiinci- "  in.sn-ad  ..f  "  if  tliey  cannot  be  nlitained." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critirisms  on  Confucius. 


speak  properly.  As  long  as  the  meaning  continues  unravelled,  and  the 
words  unexplained,  the  admonition  of  Con/uclus  remains  uncomprehen- 
sible.  Why  did  his  disciples  not  ask,  and  people  now  say  nothing? 


"Confucius  said  of  Kung  Yeh  Cliang  that  lie  might  be  wived 
and  that,  altliough  lie  was  put  iu  bonds,  lie  was  not  guilty.  At> 
♦rordingly  he  gave  liint  his  daughter  to  wife."  1 

I  ask  what  was  the  idea  of  Confucit's,  when  lie  gave  a  wife 
to  Kutiff  Yeh  Clt  ony.  Did  he  tliink  liim  (it  to  marry,  because  he 
was  thirty  years  old,  or  on  account  of  liis  excellent  conduct?  If 
he  had  his  thirty  years  in  view,  i"'  should  not  have  spoken  of 
)iis  being  in  fetters,  and  if  lie  looked  uputi  Ins  conduct,  there  was 
no  occasion  either  for  mentioning  liis  imprisonment.  VVIiy  ?  Hecause 
all  who  joined  tl"，  school  of  Confucius  were  woll-behaved.  There- 
fore tliey  were  railed  accomplishwl  folio  won*.  If  among  these 
followers  one  or  the  other  was  uimiarried,  lie  might  have  been 
married,  i)ut  it  need  not  bo  mentioned.  If  among  tlie  disciples 
many  unmarried  ones  existed  and  Kwtg  Yeh  Ch  ang  was  the  most 
virtuous  of  tliem,  and  shoukl  th«»rei'ore  Con/itcitus  have  given  him  a 
wife  alone,  then  iu  praising  liim  (j/nfuchts  ought  to  liave  enumer- 
ated his  deeds  instead  of  speaking  of  his  iiiiprisoninent.  There  are 
not  a  few  persons  in  tlie  wDrld,  wlio  suffer  violence  witliout  being 
guilty,  but  they  are  not  perlert  sages  therefore.  Of  ordinary  [)eoplo 
who  are  wronged,  then-  are  a  great  many,  not  only  one.  If  Con/ucim 
made  an  innocent  man  his  son-in-law,  lie  selected  not  a  virtuous  man, 
but  one  who  had  sufi'ered  injustiro.  The  only  praise  ( 'onfitchus  liad  for 
Kung  Yeh  Cliang  was  liis  innownw:  of  liis  doings  or  his  qualit"'s  \w 
said  not  a  word.  If  in  fact  he  was  not  virtuous,  and  Confuchts  ma'l'' 
him  his  son-in-law,  lie  did  wrong,  and  if  he  was  virtuous  indt'«»(l, 
but  Omjttcius  iu  praising  him  did  not  int-ntion  it,  lie  was  wrong 
likewise.  It  was  like  liis  giving  a  wife  to  Nan  Yung,'1  of  wliom  1"' 
said  that  '  if  the  country  were  wcll-^ovrrnctl.  he  would  not  be  out 
of  office,  and  if  it  were  ill-governed,  1"'  would  <>sc:ip,'  punisliment 
and  disgrace,'3  a  praise  which  left  nothing  to  he  desiml.4 

>   Analects  V,  I. 

， ConfxciuJi  gave  Nan  Vunp  the  dau^litor  of  his  older  brother  to  wife. 

3  Analects  V,  I. 

4  Wang  f'h'unr/'g  objecti(»ns  are  again  far-fetolied  and  groundless.  The  words 
of  ConftKius  iniply  that  Kung  Yrh  ( 'h'ang'a  diameter  was  so  excellent  and  above 
suspicion,  that  ( 'onfudt^  would  not  doubt  liim,  even  if  lie  were  rondciuned  by  the 
world  and  treated  like  a  criminal,  and  therefore  he  made  him  his  son-in-law. 


Digitized  by  Google 


398 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critiijue. 


The  Master  said  to  Tse  Kung,  "  Which  of  you  two,  yourself 
or  Hid  is  superior?  "  Tse  Kung  replied,  "  How  dare  I  compare  my- 
self with  //"*•?  If  Hui  hears  one  point,  lie  knows  therefrom  ten 
others.  If  I  hear  one,  I  know  but  two."  The  Master  said  "  Not 
equal  to  him.    I  aud  you  together  cannot  compare  with  him."  1 

Thus  witli  a  view  to  setting  forth  tlie  excellence  of  Yen  Hui  this 
question  was  put  to  Tse  Kung.  This  calls  for  the  following  remark : 

That  which  Confucius  propounded  was  propriety  and  modesty. 
Tse  Lu  would  govern  a  State  with  propriety,  but  Ins  words  were 
not  modest,  therefore  Confucius  criticized  him.3  Had  Tse  Kung 
really  been  superior  to  Hui、  he  would,  on  being  asked  by  Confucius, 
have  replied  nevertheless  that  he  was  not  equal  to  him,  aud  had 
lie  been  inferior  in  fact,  he  would  likewise  have  owned  to  his  in- 
feriority. In  tlie  first  case  the  answer  would  not  have  been  wrong 
or  a  ileception  of  the  Master,  for  propriety  and  modesty  require 
depreciatory  and  humble  words. 

What  was  the  purport  of  this  inquiry  of  Confucius!  If  he  was 
aware  that  Yen  Hui  surpassed  Tse  Kung,  lie  did  not  need  to  ask  tlie 
latter,  and  if  he  really  did  not  know,  and  therefore  asked  Tse  Kung, 
lie  would  not  have  learned  it  in  this  way  either,  for  Tse  Kung  was 
bound  to  give  a  modest  and  liumble  reply.  If  Confucius  merely 
wanted  to  eulogise  Hui  and  praise  his  virtue,  there  were  many 
other  disciples  not  enjoying  the  same  fame,  why  must  he  just  ask 
Tse  Kung? 

The  Master  said,  u  Admirable  indeed  was  the  virtue  of  Hull  "， 
and  further,  "  I  have  talked  with  Hui  for  a  whole  clay,  and  lie  has 
not  made  any  objection,  as  if  he  were  stupid  " 4  and,  "  Such  was 
Hui,  that  for  three  months  there  would  be  nothing  in  his  mind 
contrary  to  perfect  virtue."5  In  all  these  tliree  chapters  Hui  is 
praised  directly,  but  not  at  the  ccist  of  any  other  person,  why 
then  must  Tse  Kung  in  one  chapter  serve  to  him  as  a  foil? 

•  Somebody  might  think  that  Confucius  wanted  to  snub  Tse  Kung. 
At  that  time  the  fame  of  Tse  Kwiy  was  greater  than  that  of  Yen 
Hui.  Confucius  appro) ictisivt*,  lest  Tse  Kung  should  become  too  cou- 
ccittMl  aud  overbearing,  wanted  to  humble  him. 

If  h\a  name  ranked  above  that  of  Hui,  it  was  a  simple  fact 
at  that  time,  but  not  brouglit  about  by  Tse  Kunys  endeavours  to 

1  AnaUcts  V,  8. 

1  AnaUcU>  XI,  10. 

3  AnalectJt  VI,  9. 

*  Amdfcts  11,9. 
:、 AnaUcts  VI,  5. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  nt\  Confucius. 


300 


supersede  his  rival.  How  could  the  judgment  of  Tse  Kung  have 
affected  the  case?  Even  supposing  that,  in  case  Yen  Hui's  talents 
were  superior  to  his,  he  had  submitted  of  his  own  accord,  tliere 
was  no  necessity  for  any  snubbing.  If  Tse  Kung  could  not  know  it 
himself,  lie  would,  nothwitlistanding;  anything  Confwim  might  have 
said,  have  been  couvinced  that  the  latter  only  wanted  to  humble 
him,  and  in  tliat  case  -  questioning  or  no  questioning  would  have 
neither  humbled  nor  elated  him. 


Tsai  Wo  being  asleeji  during  the  day  time,  the  Master  said, 
%i  Rotten  wood  canuut  be  carved  ；  a  wall  of  dirty  earth  will  not 
receive  the  trowel.  But  what  is  the  use  of  my  reproving  Tsai 
Wo  I  "  '—For  sleeping  during  the  day  Tsai  Wo  was  reprimanded  in 
t.hia  way. 

Sleeping  during  day  time  is  a  small  evil.  Rotten  wood  and 
dirty  earth  arc  things  in  such  a  state  of  decay,  that  they  cannot 
be  repaired,  and  must  be  regarded  as  great  evils.  If  a  small  evil 
is  (； ensured,  as  though  it  wero  a  great  one,  the  person  in  question 
would  not  submit  to  such  a  judgment.  If  Tsai  Wo's  character  was 
as  bad  as  rotten  wood  or  dirty  earth,  he  ought  not  to  have  been 
admitted  to  the  school  of  Confucius  nor  rank  in  one  of  the  four 
classes  of  disciples.5  In  case  his  character  was  good  however, 
Confucius  dealt  too  harshly  with  hiin. 

"If  a  man  is  not  virtuous,  and  you  carry  your  dislike  of 
him  to  extremes,  he  will  recalcitrate."3  The  dislike  shown  by 
Confwnm  for  Tsai  Wo  lias  been ,  so  to  say,  too  strong.  Provided 
that  (； uimnon  and  ignorant  people  had  committed  some  smaller 
punishable  oflence,  and  the  judge  condemned  tliem  to  capital 
punishment,  would  tliey  sufFer  the  \v  rong,  and  complain  of  th'， 
injustice,  or  would  tliey  quietly  submit,  and  consider  themselves 
guilty?  Had  Tsai  Wo  been  an  ignorant  man,  liis  feelings  would 
have  been  the  same  with  tlioge  j>eo[)lt'  guilty  of  soint*  olfcnde;  being 
a  worthy,  he  must  liav»*  understood  a  reproof  of  Confmnns.  and 
have  reformed  at  the  slightest  remark.   An  <»pen  word  was  sufficient 


1  Analects  V,  0. 

s  The  four  classes  into  whicli  the  ten  principal  disciples  of  Confucius  were 
divided  according  to  their  special  abilities :— virtue,  eloquence,  administrative  talents, 
and  literary  ac'|uimiiciits.  Tsai  Wo  belongs  to 
tof^ether  witli  T *■*  Kung.    Cf.  Analects  XI,  2. 

3  Analects  VIII,  10. 


Digitized  by  Google 


400 


Lun-Wng:  E.  Critique. 


to  enlighten  him,  whereas  an  exaggeration  would  have  missed  its 
mark.  At  the  first  allusion  he  would  already  have  reformed.  That 
however  did  not  depend  i>n  the  strength  of  the  language  used,  but 
on  Tsai  Wo's  ability  to  cliange. 

The  scheme  of  the  "  C/iun  Ch'iu"  is  to  point  out  any  small 
goodness,  and  to  censure  small  wrongs. 1  But  if  Confucius  praised 
small  deserts  in  high  terms,  ami  censured  trifling  wrongs  immotler- 
ately,  would  Tsai  Wo  having  the  sclii'me  of  tlie  C/iun  Cliiu  in  view 
agree  with  siurli  c'riticism?  If  n<it,  Ik'  would  not  accept  it,  and 
(lie  words  of  Confucius  would  be  lost. 

The  words  of  a  Sage  must  tally  with  liis  writings.  His  words 
coine  from  his  month,  and  liis  writings  are  in  his  books,  but  both 
How  from  the  heart,  and  are  the  same  in  substance.  When  < 'on- 
fucuts  composed  the  "  Cliun  67/  m "  he  did  not  censure  small  things, 
as  if  they  were  very  important,  but  in  reproving  Txni  Wo  he  con- 
(U'uined  a  small  oll'enct^  in  t)ie  same  manner  as  an  cnorinous  crime. 
His  words  and  liis  writings  disagnn1.  How  sliould  tliey  convince 
a  man  ？ 

The  Master  said,  "  At  first  my  way  with  men  was  to  hear 
their  words,  and  to  give  tlit'm  credit  for  tlifir  conduct.  Now  my 
way  is  lo  hear  their  words,  and  look  at  their  conduct.  It  is  from 
Tsai  Wo  that  1  have  learnt  to  make  this  thange."2  That  is  from 
the  time,  when  Tmi  Wo  was  asleep  in  tlie  day  time,  he  clianged 
liis  metliod  of  studying  men.  But  one  may  well  ask,  how  can  a 
mans  sh'cjnii"-  (luring  (lie  day  time  spoil  his  character,  and  how 
can  a*  man  of  bad  conduct  bo(!onif  good  by  not  sleeping  day  or 
night?  Is  it  possible  to  learn  anything  about  people's  goodness 
or  badness  from  tlieir  slroping  during  tlie  day  time? 

Amongst  tlie  <lisci|>l«»s  of  Confucius  in  the  four  classes  Tsai 
Wo  took  jjreciedcnce  over  Tse  Kutuj.  If  lie  、vus  so  lazy,  that  nothing 
could  be  made  out  of  his  character,  how  <'(»"1<1  he  advance  so  far? 
If  Tsai  Wo  readied  sucli  a  de»rec  of  perfection  notwithstauding  his 
sleeping  during  the.  day,  liis  talents  must  have  been  far  superior  to 
those  of  ordinary  people  Supposing  that  he  had  not  yet  readied 
the  »oal,  but  wjis  under  tlir  imprt'ssion  tliat  he  had  done  enough, 
lie  <lid  not  know  better  liiinsolf.  That,  was  a  lack  of  knowledge, 
hui  Itis  condiutt  was  not  bad.  ！ Ic  on\y  wanted  some  enlijLjIiteii- 
inent,  but  to  di:"ig<'  the  metliod  of  studying  men  for  tliat  reason 
waij  superfluous. 

1  Tliis  is  professedly  1  lie  aim  of  the  "  f  'h'un-ch'iu  "  or  i4  Spring  and  Aatunin  " 
Record,  tlie  only  classical  work,  (»f  whicli  ( 'onfnciu-H  claims  the  authorship. 

2  AnaUcts  V,  9. 


gitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


401 


Let  us  assume  that  Tsai  Wo  was  conscious  of  his  deficiencies, 
but  felt  so  exhausted,  that  lie  fell  asleep  duriug  clay  time.  That 
was  a  relaxation  of  】iis  vital  force.  This  exhaustion  may  increase 
to  sucli  a  degree,  that  death  ensues  and  not  only  sleep.1 

As  regards  the  method  of  judging  human  character  by  taking 
into  consideration  the  actions,  the  wi»rds  are  disregarded,  and  by 
laying  all  stress  on  words,  tlie  conduct  is  left  out  of  consideration 
Now  although  Tsai  Wo  was  not  very  energetic  in  his  aotiuns,  his 
words  were  well  worth  li earing.  There  is  a  class  of  men  who 
speak  very  well,  but  whose  deeds  are  not  quite  satisfactory.  From 
the  time  that  Tsai  Wo  slept  during  the  day,  Confueuis  began  to  l"、ar 
the  words,  and  look  at  the  conduct,  and  only  in  case  they  both 
(•orrespomled,  called  a  man  virtuous.  That  means  to  say,  1"'  wanted 
a  perfect  man,  but  liow  does  that  agree  witli  】iis  principle  that 
perfection  must  not  be  expected  from  one  man  ？ 2 


Tse  Chang  asked  saying,  "The  minister  Tse  Wm 3  thrice  took 
office,  and  manifested  no  joy  in  his  couDt^natice.  Thrice  he  retired 
from  office,  aud  manifested  no  displeasure.  He  made  it  a  point  to 
inform  the  new  minister  of  the  way  in  which  he  had  conducted 
the  government; ― wliat  do  you  say  of  him?  "  The  Master  replied, 
"He  was  loyal." ― "Was  he  benevolent?  4*  I  do  not  know.  How 
can  he  be  pronounced  benevolent?4  Tse  WM  recommended  Tse  Yti 
of  C/iu  as  his  successor.  Tse  Yil  attacked  Sttny  with  a  hundred  war- 
chariots,  but  was  defeated  and  lost  most  of  his  men.5  If  Tse  \\  rn 
was  ignorant  like  that,  how  could  ho  be  considered  benevolent?" ― 

My  question  is  this.  Wlien  Tse  Win  recommended  Tse  Yil,  lie 
did  not  know  hiui,  but  wisdom  has  no  tiling  to  do  with  virtue. 
Ignorance  does  not  preclude  benevolent  deeds.  Their  are  the  five 
virtues: ― benevolence,  justice,  propriety,  intelligence,  an<l  truth,  but 
these  five  are  separate,  and  not  necessarily  combined.  Thus  there 
are  intelligent  men,  benevolent  men,  there  are  the  well-man uered, 
and  the  just.  The  truthful  must  not  always  be  intelligent,  or  the 
intelligent,  benevolent,  the  benevolent,  well-mannered,  or  the  well- 
maunered,  just.    Tse  Wins  intelligence  was  obfuscated  by  Tse  \% 

1  Tsai  Wo  could  no  more  be  made  responsible  for  his  bodily  weakness,  than 
for  his  death. 

a  Analects  XUI,  15  and  XVIII，  10. 
， A  minister  of  the  Ch'u  State. 

4  Analects  V，  18.  The  following  words  of  Confucius  are  omitted  in  our  Analects. 
s  This  battle  took  place  in  632  b.c.  It  is  described  in  the  Tw-chuan  Book  V,27 
(Duke  H4  27th  year).  • 


402  Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique.  • 

but  how  did  his  benevolence  suffer  therefrom?  Consequently  it  is 
not  right  to  say,  "  How  can  he  be  pronounced  benevolent? " 

Moreover  loyal  means  generous,  and  generosity  is  benevolence. 
Qm/ucius  said,  "  By  observing  a  man's  faults  it  may  be  known  that 
he  is  benevolent."  1  Tse  W^n  possessed  true  benevolence.  If  Confucius 
says  that  loyalty  is  not  benevolence,  he  might  as  well  assert  that 
father  and  mother  are  not  tlie  two  parents,  or  that  husband  and 
wife  are  not  a  pair. 


The  duke  At2  asked  which  of  the  disciples  loved  to  learn. 
Confucim  replied  to  him,  "  There  was  Yen  Hut.  He  did  not  vent 
his  anger  on  others,  nor  did  he  twice  commit  the  same  fault.  Alas! 
his  fate  was  short  and  he  died;  and  now  there  is  none.  I  have 
not  yet  beard  of  any  one  who  loves  to  learu." 3 ― 

What  was  really  the  cause  of  Yen  Hui's  death?  It  is,  of  course, 
attributed  to  his  short  fate,  which  would  correspond  to  Po  Nius 
8i<'kuess.4  All  living  men  have  received  their  fate,  which  is  com- 
plete, and  must  be  clean.5  Now  there  being  the  evil  disease  of  Po 
Niu,°  one  says  that  he  had  no  fate,7  Those  who  remain  alive, 
must  have  been  endowed  with  a  long  fate.  If  a  person  has  ob- 
tained a  short  fate,  we  should  likewise  nay  that  he  liaa  no  fate. 
Provided  that  heaven's  fate  can  be  short  or  long,  it  also  must  be 
good  or  bad.  Speaking  of  Yen  Hui's  short  fate,  one  can  speak  like- 
wise of  Po  Niu  's  bad  fate.  Saying  that  Po  Niu  had  no  fate,  one 
must  admit  that  Yen  Ilui  had  no  fate  either.  One  died,  the  other 
was  diseasetl:  C<mfmim  pitied  them  both,  and  called  it  fate.  The 
thing  which  is  derived  from  heaven  is  the  same,  but  it  is  not  given 
the  same  name,  for  Avhich  1  do  not  see  any  apparent  reason.8 

1  Analects  IV,  7. 

a  Duke  Ai  of  Lu,  4*U-468  b.c. 

J  Analects  VI,  2. 

«  AnalerU  VI,  8. 

'- Wang  Cltuug  understands  by  fate  something  material,  not  a  decree.  Cf. 
Chap.  VII  and  VIII. 

8  Leprosy.    Cf.  j>.  165. 

7  Fat«  \h  a  pure  sulistanoe  pervading  the  body,  wliich  cannot  excite  a  foul 
disease  like  leprosy. 

8  Tlie  entire  polemic  is  against  the  expre»si«>n  "  short  fate  "  used  by  Cvnfwiusy 
who  takes  fate  in  the  usual  lUTeplation  of  decree,  or  appointment  of  heaven.  Wang 
(lixtny  from  liis  materialistic  point  oi'  view  argues,  that  fa  to  is  always  complete  and 
pure,  and  that  there  can  be  iu>  long  or  short  one.  Tlie  premature  deatli  of  }'w  Hai 
and  the  disease  of  Po  Niu  arc  not  fate  at  all. 


igitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


403 


Duke  Ai  asked  Confucius  who  loved  to  learn.  Confucius  replied, 
" There  was  Yen  Hui  who  loved  to  learn,  but  now  there  is  none. 
He  did  not  vent  his  anger  on  others  nor  commit  the  same  fault 
twice."— Why  did  Confucius  say  so? 

There  are  those  who  presume  that  Confucius  wished  to  add  a 
criticism  on  Duke  Ai's  character,  and  that  therefore  he  spoke  of 
the  venting  of  anger  and  committing  faults  twice.  Sticking  to  the 
duke's  inquiry,  he  gave  him  this  reply,  thereby  at  the  same  time 
censuring  the  duke's  short-coinings,  hut  without  committing  himself. 

However  K'ang  Tse1  likewise  asked  about  the  love  of  learning, 
and  Confucius  in  his  answer  also  indicated  Yen  Hui.2  K  any  Tse  had 
liis  faults  as  well,  why  did  Confucius  not  answer  so  as  to  reprove 
K'ang  Tse  too?  K'ang  Tse  was  not  a  sage,  liis  doiugs  wore  not 
without  fault.  In  fact  K  ang  Tse  was  distressed  about  the  number 
of  thieves.  Confucius  replied,  "  If  you,  sir,  were  not  covetous,  al- 
though you  should  reward  them  to  do  it,  they  would  not  steal."3 
This  shows  that  K  ang  Tse 's  weak  point  was  his  covetousness.  Why 
did  uot  Confucius  attack  it? 


Confucius  having  visited  Nan  Tse,  Tse  Lu  was  disploaaed,  on 
which  the  Master  said,  "If  I  have  done  a  wicked  thing,  may 
Heaven  fall  down  on  me,  may  Heaven  fall  down  on  ino!  'M ― 

Nan  Tse  was  the  wife  of  Duke  Liiuj  of  Wei.6  iShe  had  invited 
Cou/itcim.  Tse  Ln  was  displeased  and  suspected  Confucim  of  having 
had  illicite  intercourse  with  her.  In  order  to  exculpate  himself 
ConfueiiiA-  said,  "  If  I  have  done  any  thing  cliHgraceful,  may  Heavou 
crush  me.''  To  prove  his  perfect  sincerity  lie  swore  that  he  did 
not  deceive  Tse  Lu. 

I  ask: ― by  thus  exonerating  himself,  does  Confucius  really  clear 
himself?  If  it  had  happened  once,  that  Heaven  ft' II  down,  and  killed 
people  for  having  perpetrated  any  disgraceful  act,  I 'oitfuvim-  might 
allude  to,  aud  swear  by  it.  Tsr  Lu  would  most  prol)ably  believe 
him  then,  and  lie  would  he  whitewashed.    Now,  noboily  has  ever 

' The  head  of  the  Chi  family  in  Lu. 
， Analecti  XI,  G 

3  Analects  XII，  18. 

4  AnaUch  VI,  2(5. 

5  A  most  disreputable  woman,  j^iilty  of  irn-i-st  with  her  half-brother,  Prince 
(； hou  of  Sung.  The  commentators  lake  ^reat  pains  tu  whitewasli  (.'onf'uch",  who 
called  U]K)ii  this  unworthy  princess.  Wliat  induced  her  to  invite  the  Sage,  and  him 
to  accept  the  invitatum,  is  not  known.    Various  «i>tijectures  have  been  put  forward. 


Digitized  by  Google 


404 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  (>iti<jue. 


been  crushed  by  Heaven.  Would  therefore  Tse  Lu  believe  in  an 
oath  to  the  e fleet  that  Heaven  might  fall  down  on  him? 

It  happens  sometimes  that  a  man  is  killed  by  lightning, 
drowned  by  water,  burned  by  fire,  or  crushed  by  the  tumbling 
wall  of  a  houso.  Had  Confucius  said  "  May  the  lighting  strike  rae, 
the  water  drown  me,  the  fire  burn  me,  or  a  wall  crush  ine,"  Tse 
Lu  would  umloubtcdl);  liave  believed  him,  but  instead  of  that  he 
swore  before  Tse  Lu  by  a  disaster,  which  lias  nover  bt'fore  happened. 
How  could  this  dispel  Tse  Lu.s  doubts,  and  make  him  holieve? 

Sometimes  people  aiv  crushed  while  asleep,  before  they  awake. 
Can  we  say  that  Heaven  crushed  them?  All  those  who  are  crushed 
in  their  sleep,  before  they  awake,  have  not  of  necessity  done  some  dis- 
honest deed.  Though  not  far  advanced  in  pliilosophy,  yet  Tse  Lu  knew 
how  to  distinguish  the  truth  of  a  thing.  Confucius  swearing  by  some- 
thing unreal  Tse  Lu  would  assuredly  not  Lave  got  rid  of  his  doubts. 

( 'onfuciu-s  asserted  that  life  and  death  were  fate,  and  that 
wealth  and  lionour  depended  on  Heaven.1  Accordingly  human  life 
(>un  be  long  or  sliort,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  human  actions, 
goodness  or  badness.  In  fact  Yen  Hut  died  prematurely,  aud  Confucius 
spoke  of  his  short  fate.2  Are  we  entitled  to  conclude  t  lie  re  from 
that  people  whose  fate  is  short  and  who  die  young,  must  have 
done  something  、vrong? 

Although  Tse.  Lu  was  not  yet  very  prolicient  in  philosophy, 
yet  from  thtr  words  of  ('on/uciu.s  he  knew  the  real  meaning  oi*  life 
and  death.  Confucius  swore  that,  if  lie  had  douo  anything  disb<ui«st, 
Heaven  might  crush  him  instead  of  telling  Tse  Lu  that  he  、、- as  only 
under  the  rule  of  fate,  for  how  could  Heaven  fall  down  upon  him 
and  kill  him,  before  the  appointed  time  of  his  death  had  oomc? 
Thus  on  taking  his  oath  before  Lu  tliat  Heaven  might  crush 
liim,  lie  could  not  expect  to  find  credence,  and  in  tliat  case  the 
exculpation  of  Confucius  would  have  been  no  exculpation. 

The  S/ni-kin(/'A  says,  "  Be  not  as  arrogant  a«  Tan  ('hu，*  who  only 
liked  to  saunter  idly  about."  Thus  tlie  Emperor  Shun  admonished 
Ffl  not  to  treat  an  unworthy  son  like  a  son,  and  to  pay  attention 
to  the  commands  of  Heaven.  He  was  alarmed,  lest  Yd  should  be 
partial  to  his  son,  therefore  lie  adduced  Tan  (>hu  as  an  example 
calculated  t.(»  dot«T  him.    Hut  Yil  replied : 5 — "I  had  my  marriage 

1  Cf.  p.  136. 

»  Cf.  p.  151. 

3  Shu-kiny,  Yi-chi,  Pt.  II,  Bk.  IV,  1  {I^gge  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  p.  84). 

*  Yao'"  son. 

' Shu-king  be.  cit. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


405 


ou  the  /'.、.'•■"》， jm、  kwei,  and  chin  days.  When  the  cr'wa  and  whines 
of  my  son  were  first  heard,  1  did  not  treat  him  like  ray  son."  He 
related  something  that  had  liappened,  from  tlie  past  forecasting 
the  future,  and  deducting  wliat  could  not  bo  seen  l'roin  that  which 
was  apparent.  Thus  lit;  demonstrated  that  he  would  not  venture 
to  show  partiality  for  an  unworthy  son.  He  did  not  say:—"  May 
Heaven  fall  down  on  me,"  knowing  very  well  that  common  people 
in  swearing  like  to  invoke  Heaven. 

When  Tse  Lu  suspected  the  actions  of  Confucius,  tlie  latter  did 
not  refer  to  his  conduct  in  the  past  to  .prove  that  he  had  done 
nothing  reproach  able,  but  said  that  Heaven  might  crush  him.  How 
does  he  differ  from  common  people,  who  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
pelling a  doubt  will  solemnly  protest  by  Heaven  ？ 


L'onfucim  said:—"  The  plupnix  does  not  i，<mie;  the  River  sends 
forth  no  Plan:— it  is  all  over  witli  me!"1 

The  Master  felt  distressed  that  lie  did  not  become  emperor. 
As  emperor  he  would  have  brought  about  perfect  peace.  At  such 
a  time  th£  plictnix  would  have  made  its  appearance,  and  the  Plan 
would  have  emerged  from  the  Yellow  River.5  Now  he  did  not 
obtain  imperial  authority,  therefore  there  were  no  auspicious  portents 
either,  and  Confucius  felt  sick  at  heart  and  distressed.  Hence  his 
words: 一 "It  is  all  over  witli  me!" 

My  question  is: 一 Which  after  all  are  the  necessary  conditions 
preceding  the  appearance  of  the  phtrnix  and  the  Plan  of  tlie  River, 
which  though  fulfilled,  did  not  bring  about  tlieir  arrival?3  If  it 
be  perfect  peace,  it  may  be  urged  that  not  all  the  emperors,  under 
whose  rt'ign  perfect  peace  prevailed,  attracted  the  ph(Riiix  or  the 
Plan  of  tlie  River. 

The  Five  Emperors  and  the  Three  Kulers4  all  brought  about 
IM-rfect  peace,  but  (M)in[iaring  their  omens,  wc  find  that  tliey  had 
not  all  the  plnniix  as  an  indispensable  attribute.  Durinn;  tlie  time 
of  perfect  peace  tlie  plurnix  is  not  a  necessary  omen.  That  Con- 
fiiciwi,  a  sage,  should  liave  longed  so  much  tor  something  that  was 
not  at  all  indispensable,  ntul  that  he  worried  himself,  is  not  right. 


' Analects  IX,  8. 

a  On  the  Plan  of  the  Yellow  River  vid.  p.  294  Note  1. 

8  In  the  case  of  Confucius. 

*  Cf.  p.  138. 


406 


Lun  -  Hcng :  E.  Critique. 


Somebody  might  object  that  Confucius  did  not  sorrow,  because 
lie  was  not  appointvd  emperor,  but  that,  when  he  felt  so  sad,  there 
was  no  wise  ruler,  and  tliat  therefore  he  did  not  find  employment. 
The  plurnix  and  the  Plan  of  the  lliver  are  omens  of  a  wise  ruler. 
As  long  as  they  are  absent,  there  is  no  wise  ruler,  and  witliout  a 
wise  ruler  Omjucim  had  no  eliance  of  finding  employment. 

How  are  these  auguries  called  forth?  By  appointing  wise 
<ind  able  men  the  grtveniment  is  set  right,  and  great  suciress  ob- 
tained. Then  the  omens  appear.  After  tliey  have  made  their  ap- 
pearance, there  is  no  further  need  for  a  Confucius.  Why  has  ( on- 
fucwu  only  the  end  in  view? 1  He  does  not  think  of  the  first  steps,9 
and  solely  sees  the  end,  does  not  assist  a  king  as  minister,  but 
speaks  of  those  portents.3  The  government  not  being  iu  order, 
those  things,  of  course,  do  not  become  visible. 

To  cont'liule  from  their  arrival  tliat  there  must  be  a  wise 
ruler,  would  also  h,'  a  mistake.  'The  empvror  Hsiao  W^n  Ti*  dt'served 
tlit*  name  of  a  wise  ruler,  yet.  in  his  annals5  we  find  nothing  about 
a  phd'nix  or  tlie  Plan  of  tlit*  Riv<T.  Mad  Confucim  lived  under 
Hsiao  Wen  Ti  he  would  likrwis*'  liave  complained: ― "It  is  all  over 
with  me! ，， 


Tin'  Ma«l<T  was  expressing  a  wish  to  live  among  the  Nine 
Wild  Tribes  of  the  oast.  Some  oiw  said,  Thry  are  l)rutisl).  How 
can  you  (io  nxwh  a  tiling?  "  Tho  Master  said,  "If  a  superior  man 
dwelt  anions  lliein,  wliat  brutality  would  .there  be?  "fl 

( '<"ifw.、ius  felt  annoy  "I,  bc<',ause  his  doctrine  did  not  find  its 
way  into  China.  Tliis  loss  of  !iis  hopes  roused  his  anger,  antl 
made  him  wish  to  finii»ratt»  to  the  Wild  Tribes.  Some  oue  remon- 
strated, asking,  liow  lit*  could  do  suoh  a  tiling,  since  the  savages 
w«*n-  brutish  and  uiunamierly.  To  wliicli  Confucim  retorted  by 
saying.  "  If  a  superior  iikhi  (l、v<'lt  :im("ig  them,  what  brutality 
would  tlu'rt'  b(':、"，  wliirh  means  to  say  tliat,  if  a  superior  man  wen* 

1  The  time  when  tlic  lucky  omens  hecome  visible. 

2  The  stops  to  sc'ure  a  wise  government  and  perfect  j>eaoe,  which  must  have 
hoi-ii  sui-ressful,  ere  the  phd-nix  and  the  Plan  will  come  forward. 

3  Wishing  to  behold  those  auspicious  portenta,  f  ovfucim  ought  first  to  have 
instituted  an  excellent  adniinistration,  as  iuini.ster  of  the  reigning  sovereign.  He  sees 
the  result,  hut  overlooks  the  causes. 

*  The  Hon  emperor  whose  reign  lasted  from  179-156  B.C. 
^  In  tho  Shi-chi. 
fi  Analects  X,  13. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confuetus. 


107 


living  among  thorn  «md  imparting  bis  doctrine,  there  would  be  no 
more  rudeness. 

How  did  Coufmhis  conceive  the  idea  of  ^oing  to  the  Nine 
Tribes? ― Because  his  doctrine  did  not  spread  in  China,  he  wislied 
to  go  there.  But  if  Cliina  was  no  field  for  it,  how  i:oul<l  it  have 
spread  among;  the  savages?  "  The  rude  tribes  of  the  ea«t  and  north 
with  their  princes  are  still  not  equal  to  China  without  princes." 1 
That  shows  that  things  w  hicli  are  easily  managed  in  China  are 
very  (lifiicult  among  the  savages.  Can  tlien  something  which  has 
failed,  w  lie  re  every  tiling  is  easy,  be  carried  through,  wliere  every- 
thing is  difficult? 

Furthermore,  Confucius  said,  "If  a  superior  man  dwelt  among- 
them,  how  caiue  one  to  sp,'ak  of  brutality."  Does  that  mean  that 
the  superior  mati  keeps  liis  culture  for  himself,  or  that  he  imparts 
it?  Should  lie  keep  it  closed  up  in  his  bosom,  lie  might  do  that 
in  China  as  well,  and  need  not  go  to  the  savagrs  for  tliat  purpose. 
If,  however,  he  should  instruct  the  savages  in  it,  how  could  they 
be  taught'.* 

Yii  visited  the  State  ol"  tlic  Naked  I'oiple.  lie  was  nakod 
liimself,  while  he  stayed  with  them,  ami  only  when  ho  left,  lie 
put  on  his  clothes  again.  The  habit  of  wearing  dothes  did  not 
take  root  among  the  wild  tribes.  Yil  \\  as  unable  to  teach  the 
Naked  People  to  \vt«ar  clothes,  how  could  ( 'on/ucius  make  superior 
men  of  tlie  Nine  Tribes.'  ， 

Perhaps  Omfiu-ins,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  did  not  wisli  to  go 
to  the  wild  tribes  aftor  all,  but  grieved  that  liis  doctrine  was  not 
accepted,  he  merely  said  so  in  angry  mood.  Or,  wh«'n  some  one 
remonstrated,  lit*  knew  pretty  w  ell  t)iat  the  wild  tribes  were  bar- 
barians, but  nevertheless  lie  said,  What  brutality  would  tht*re 
be?  "，  insisting  on  having  his  own  way  and  warding  oil'  tl"'  attack 
of  liis  interloi'utor.  If  lie  really  did  not  want  to  go,  hut  said  so 
out  of  disgust,  \w  did  not  It'll  the  trutli.  •'  What  the  superior 
man  requires,  is  just  that  iti  liis  words  tluMe  may  he  notliiug  in- 
••orrcct."2  II'  ( 'f>nj'iii  iiu<!  knew  that  the  wild  tribes  were  uncivilized, 
hut  at  all  costs  insisr，'（l  on  bein«>'  ri*jlit,  this  was  like  thv  disctussiofj 
of  'ise  Lu  with  「"/!/•"''/,/、、'  about  T^e  f\rw. 

Tsc.  Lu  got  'Ise  h'an 3  appointed  governor  of  /V.4  Tlic  Master 
said,  "  You  are  injuring  a  man's  son."     T<e  Lu  replied,  "  There 

>  AnaUcts  HI, 

2  AnaUcU  XIII,  3. 

s  The  disciple  luio  7'w  huo. 

*  A  city  in  Shantuny. 


Digitized  by  Google 


•108 


Luti-FI^ng:  E.  Critique. 


are  the  spirits  of  the  land  and  grain,  and  there  are  the  people. 
Why  must  one  read  books,  before  he  can  be  considered  to  have 
learned? "  The  Master  said,  41  It  is  on  this  account  that  I  liate 
your  glib-tongued  people."  1 

Tse  Lu  knew  that  one  must  not  «pve  an  inconsiderate  answer 
in  order  to  have  one's  own  way.  ('onfucim  was  displeased  with 
liiui,  and  eoin pared  him  with  those  glib-tougued  people.  He  like- 
wise knew  the  impropriety  of  such  replies,  but  lie  and  Tse  Lu  gave 
both  glib-tongued  answers. 


Confucius  said,  *'  T se^  did  not  receive 3  Heaven's  decree,  but 
his  goods  are  increased  by  liim,  and  his  calculations  are  generally 
correct."4 

What  docs  he  mean  by  saying  that  T  se  did  not  receive 
Heavens  decree ?  One  might  .suppose  that  he  received  the  fate 
that  he  should  become  rich,  and  by  his  own  method  knew  before- 
hand, what  was  going  .to  happen,  and  in  his  calculation  did  not 
miss  the  riglit  inoment.  Now,  does  wealth  and  honour  depend  on 
Heaven's  appointment  or  on  human  knowledge?  In  the  first  case 
nobody  could  obtain  them  by  his  own  knowledge  or  cleverness, 
if,  on  the  other  hand,  men  were  the  chief  ageuts,  why  does  Con- 
fudm  say  that  life  and  death  are  fate,  and  wealth  and  honour 
depend  on  heaven?5 

If  we  admit  that  wealth  can  be  acquired  by  knowing  tlie 
proper  way  without  receiving  Heaven's  decree,  tlicn  honour  also 
can  be  won  through  personal  energy  without  fate.  But  in  this 
world  there  is  nobody  who  has  won  honour  quite  by  himself 
without  a  heavenly  order  to  that  effect.  Hence  we  learn  that  we 
cannot  acquire  wealth  by  ourselves,  unless  we  have  received  Heaven's 
order. 

1  AnakcU,  XI,  24. 
■J   Tse  Kung. 

3  We  must  translate  here  "  receive,"  and  not  "  acquiesce,"  .»» '  L^gge  docs, 
relying  on  the  rommentators.  •'  Ac(|uiesce "  gives  no  sense  here,  as  can  be  se«n 
l，y  oompariiig  Hutcl""，on'，  translation,  '  hina  Review  Vol.  VII,  p.  1G9.  Moreover, 
" receive  "  is  in  acoordance  witli  Wnng  Ch  ung's  system.  Throughout  his  work  he 
.speaks  of  "  receiving  the  fate.''  Hutchinson  liaa  felt,  tliat  "  receive  "  is  the  proper 
word  liere  —  PfV/.  Iiis  note  to  p.  170  he.  cit. 一 but  is  overawed  by  htggt  and  the 
commentators.  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  Wang  ('Knng  very  frequently  pats  another 
construction  on  the  words  of  the  Sage  than  other  commentators. 

*   AnaUds  XI,  IS. 

s   Cf.  p.  130. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


409 


Iu  fact  Confucius  did  not  acquire  wealth  and  honour.  He 
wandered  about,  hoping  that  his  services  would  he  required.  Having 
exhausted  all  his  wisdom  in  remonstrating  with  the  princes  and 
being  at  his  wits'  end,  he  went  home,  and  fixed  the  text  of  the 
Sliiking  and  the  Shuking.  His  hopes  were  gone,  and  expectations 
he  had  none. 【le  said  that  it  was  all  over  with  him,1  for  he  was 
well  aware  that  his  destiny  was  not  to  be  rich  and  honoured,  and 
that  all  his  travels  could  not  supply  this  want.  Confucius  knew 
that  he  had  not  received  the  destiny  of  a  mail  who  will  become 
exalted,  and  that  search iug  for  honour  on  liis  travels,  he  would 
never  find  it.  Yet  he  maiutained  that  T'se  was  not  destined  to 
be  rich,  but  acquired  wealth  by  his  astuteness.  The  words  and 
the  actions  of  Confucius  disagree,  one  does  not  know  why. 

Some  say  that  he  wished  to  attack  the  faults  of  Tse  Kung, 
who  did  not  care  much  for  the  right  doctrine  or  virtue,  but  only 
for  the  increase  of  his  wealth.  Conftuntis  therefore  reproved  his 
fault,  wishing  to  induce  him  to  comply  entirely,  and  to  change  his 
conduct.  Combating  Tse  h'ungs  shortcomings  he  might  say  that  he 
did  not  love  the  doctrine  or  virtue,  but  only  his  wealth,  but  why 
must  he  assert  that  he  had  not  received  the  fate,  which  is  in  op- 
positiou  to  his  former  utterance  that  wealth  and  honour  depend 
on  Heaven  ? 


When  Yen  Yuan  died,  the  Master  said ： ― "Alas!  Heaven  is 
destroying  me!    Heaven  is  destroying  me!  " 2 

This  means  that,  wlien  a  man  is  to  rise,  Heaven  gives  him 
a  support,  whereas,  when  his  destruction  is  impending,  lie  deprives 
him  of  his  assistance.  Conjuctm  had  four  friends,  l)v  whom  he 
hoped  to  rise,3  but  Yen  Yuan  died  prematurely.  Therefore  his  ex- 
clamation ： ― " Heaven  is  destroying  me! " 

One  may  ask: ― Did  Yen  Yuan  die,  because  Confucius  did  not 
become  an  emperor,  snatched  away  by  Heaven,  or  did  he  die  au 
untimely  death  of  himself,  liis  allotted  span  being  so  short? ― If 
he  died  prematurely,  because  his  appointed  time  was  short,  l>e 
was  bound  to  die,  and  even  if  Confucius  had  become  an  emperor, 
he  would  not  liavc  remained  alive. 


1  Cf.  above  p.  405. 

2  AnaUct»  XI,  H. 

3  These  four  friends  were :  Yen  Yuan,  IW  h'uu<f,  7>  Clutny,  and  Tw  Lu,  all 
his  disciples. 


Digitized  by  Google 


110 


Lun-Hrng:  E.  Critiquo. 


The  support  of  a  man  is  like  a  st"，k，  on  which  a  sick  person 
leaning.  A  sick  man  requires  a  stick  to  walk.  Now,  let  the 
stick  be  sliortened  by  cutting  ofT  a  piece,  can  we  say  tlien  that 
Ileavon  compelled  tin'  sick  man  not  to  walk  any  more?  If  he 
could  rise  still,  could  the  short  stick  be  lengtlifiied  again?  Yen 
Ytuin's  short  life  is  like  the  shortness  of  tlie  stick. 

Couftic'nis  said  tliat  Heaven  was  destroying  liim,  because  Yen 
Yuan  was  a  worthy. 1  But  worthies  in  life  must  not  necessarily 
act  as  sii[)j)orters  of  somebody,  just  as  sagt'8  do  not  always  receive 
Heaven's  special  appointment.  Among  tlie  emperors  there  are  many 
who  arc  not  sages,  ami  tlieir  ministers  are  very  often  not  worthies. 
Why'.'  Because  fate  and  externals2  are  din'erent  from  man's  talents. 
On  this  principle  it  was  by  no  means  certain  that  Yen  Yuan,  had 
lie  been  alive,  would  have  brcome  the  supporter  of  ('onf'uciws,  or 
that  by  his  (loath  lie  ruined  ( 'onfucms.  "What  proof  had  tlie  latter 
then  for  his  assertion  that  Heaven  was  destroying  him? 

What  was  Heaven's  idea  after  all  that  it  did  not  make  Coit- 
fucim  emperor.'  Did  it  not  appoint  him,  when  he  received  I  its 
life  ami  liis  fate,  or  was  it  going  to  appoint  him,  but  repented 
afterward s?  If  originally  lie  was  not  appointed,  what  harm  could 
be  clone  by  )》" Yuan's  death'.'  If  he  、vas  first  chosen  tor  tlie  im- 
perial dignity,  and  this  scliemc  was  abandoned  later  on,  no  ex- 
ternals cain,、  into  (|iiestioii,  an<l  the  dt'cision  rested  solely  with 
Heaven.  And  then  whirli  good  acts  of  Confucius  did  Heaven  seo 
to  make  him  einjieror,  und  whidi  bad  i>nes  did  it  hear  subse- 
quently, that  it  rlianged  its  mind,  and  did  not  invest  liim .'  Tin* 
Spirit  of  ITi*a\  en  must  li.ive  erred  in  his  deliberations  and  not  liave 
made  the  necessary  investigations. 


When  Confucius  went  to  Hv/,  the  funeral  rites  of  a  former 
land-lord  of  his  、ver,，  just  going  <>n  there,  lie  stoj)|»ed  into  tlie 
house  and  \vej»t,  and,  wheti  lie  came  out,  lie  ordered  7:"'  Kung  to 
unliarnass  one  outside  horse,  and  give  it  as  a  present.  Tse  Kung 
remarked :  —  "  At  the  (It'atli  of  your  disciple,  you  did  not  unliarnass 
a  liorse,  hut  do  it  now  for  an  old  laud-lord.  Is  that  not  too  inucli? " 

1  As  a  worthy,  a  degree  of  excellence  next  to  sageliood,  he  would  have 
assisted  L'lmfudw  in  liis  brilliant  career. 

2  In  externals  viz.  the  osseous  structuro  and  tlie  pliysignomy  of  au  individual 
his  fate  becomes  ni.inifest.  Cf.  Cliap.  XXIV.  But  fate  by  no  means  corresponds  to 
talents  and  virtue. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Coiifuciius. 


ni 


(  onfitcim  replied,  "  When  I  just  now  went  in,  I  wept,  aud  over- 
whelmed with  grief,  went  out,  and  cried.  1  cannot  bear  the  idea 
that  ray  tears  should  not  be  accompanied  by  sonietliing.  Therefore, 
my  son,  do  as  I  told  you."  1 

Confucius  unharnassed  his  horse,  and  gave  it  away  for  tlio 
old  lodging-house  keeper,  because  he  could  not  bear  the  thought 
that  his  feelings  should  not  be  accompanied  by  some  a«t  of  courtesy. 
Along  with  such  feelings  politeness  must  he  shown.  When  his  fee- 
lings are  touched,  a  man  is  moved  to  kindness.  Courtesy  and  emotion 
must  correspond.  A  superior  man  at  least  will  act  in  that  way. 

When  Yen  Yuan  died,  the  Master  bewailed  him,  and  was 
deeply  moved.  His  disciples  said  to  him: ― ifc Master,  you  are  deeply 
moved."  He  replied ： ― "If  I  were  not  dee[»ly  moved  at  this  man's 
demise,  at  wliose  should  I  Ik'?"2 

Such  deep  emotion  is  the  climax  of  ^vlef.  Bewailing  Yen  Yttan 
his  emotion  was  different  from  that  of  all  the  other  pupils.  Grief 
is  the  greatest  sorrow. ― When  Yen  \'uaii  died,  his  coffin  liad  no 
outer  shell.  Yen  Tm3  begged  tlie  carriage  of  the  Master  to  sell  and 
get  an  outer  shell  for  the  coffin,  but  Cori/ucius  did  not  give  it, 
because  a  high  officer  could  not  walk  afoot.4  Mourning  over  the 
old  lodging-house  keeper,  he  unliaruassed  a  horse  to  give  it  away 
as  a  present,  because  he  did  not  like  that  his  tears  should  not 
be  accompanied  by  some  gift.  Bewailing  Yen  Yuan  he  was  deeply 
moved,  yet,  when  asked,  he  declined  to  give  his  carriage  away, 
so  that  his  emotion  hud  no  counterpart  in  his  actions.  What 
difference  is  tliere  hrtween  tears  and  emotion,  or  between  a  horse 
and  a  carriage?  In  one  oase  politeness  and  sentiment  were  in  har- 
mony, in  the  other  kindness  and  riglit  feeling  <lid  not  oorrespond. 
We  do  not  see.  clearly  wliat  ( 'onfucius'  ideas  about  polKeness  were. 

Co"fuc'""  said,  "There  was  Li;  when  be  died,  he  had  a  coffin, 
hut  no  outer  shell.  I  would  not  walk  on  foot  to  get  a  shell  for 
】iim."s ― The  love  for  Li  must  have  been  deeper  than  lliat  for  Yfn 
Yiuin.  When  Li  clietl,  he  got  no  shell,  bt-cause  it  、vas  not  Iwomiiig 
for  a  high  officer  to  walk  on  loot.  Li  was  the  son  of  「""/，"•<•'"、 
Yen  Yu/m  bore  another  surnanu*.  When  tlio  son  dii'd,  he  did  not 
receive  that  present,  liow  much  loss  had  a  man  of  another  name 
a  right  to  it? 

1  Quotation  from  the  Li-ki,  T  an  Kunp  I  {Ugge'i>  transl.  Vol.  I,  p.  136). 

a  Analects  XI,  'J. 

3  The  father  of  IWi  Yuan. 

*  Ana  lev  (m  XI,  7. 

5  Loc.  tit. 


Digitized  by  Google 


412 


Liui-Hrng:  E.  Critique. 


Then  this  would  be  a  proof  of  the  real  kindness  of  C<mfitc'ms. 
If  lie  showed  himself  afl'cctionate  towards  his  old  ljind-lord,  whereas 
his  kindness  did'  not  extend  to  liis  sou,  was  it  perhaps,  because 
previously  lie  was  an  inferior  official,  and  afterwards  a  liigh  officer  ? 
When  he  was  an  inferior  official  first,  as  such  lie  could  ride  in  a 
carriage  with  two  horses,  as  «i  liigh  officer  he  would  drive  with 
three.  A  high  officer  could  not  do  without  his  carriage  aud  walk 
on  foot,  but  why  did  he  not  sell  two  horses  to  get  a  sbell,  and 
drive  with  the  remaining  one?  When  he  was  an  official,  he  rode  in 
a  carriage  with  two  horses,  and  parted  with  one  for  the  sake  of 
the  old  lodging-house  keeper.  Why  did  he  not  part  with  two  now 
to  show  his  kindness,  only  keeping  one  to  avoid  walking  on  foot? 

Had  he  not  given  away  one  horse  as  a  present  for  the  old 
lodgiug-house  keeper,  he  would  not  have  transgressed  any  statute, 
but  by  burying  his  son  with  a  coffin,  but  without  a  shell  he  com- 
mitted an  offence  against  propriety,  and  showed  a  disregard  for 
custom.  Coiifucius  attached  great  importance  to  the  present,  which 
he  was  kind  enough  to  make  to  the  old  mau,  and  treated  the  funeral 
ceremonies  for  his  son  very  lightly.  Honour  was  shown  to  a 
8tranger,  but  the  rites  were  neglected  in  the  case  of  his  own  son. 
Since  Confuchis  did  not  sell  his  carriage  to  get  a  shell  for  Li,  lie 
cannot  clear  himself  of  the  reproach  of  being  an  office-hunter, 
who  was  afraid  of  beiug  without  his  carriage.  And  yet  he  has 
maintained  himself  that  a  superior  man  "  will  even  sacrifice  bis 
life,  to  preserve  his  virtue  complete."  1  Could  it  then  be  so  difficult 
to  give  up  one's  dignity  in  order  to  preserve  propriety? 


Tse  Kung  asked  about  government.  The  Master  said,  "The  requi- 
sites of  government  are  that  there  be  a  sufticiency  of  food,  a  sufficiency 
of  military  equipment,  and  the  confidence  of  the  people  in  their  ruler." 

'J\se  Kung  said,  "  If  it  cannot  be  helped,  and  one  of  these 
must  be  dispensed  with,  which  of  the  three  should  be  foregone 
first?"    "  The  military  equipment "  said  the  Master. 

Tse  Kung  a^ain  asked,  "  If  it  cannot  be  helped,"  and  one  of 
tht«  remaining  two  must  be  dispenstnl  with,  which  of  them  should 
be  foregone'.' "  The  Master  answered :  "  Part  with  the  food.  From 
of  old,  death  has  been  the  lot  of  all  men;  but  if  the  people  have 
no  faith  in  their  rulers,  there  is  no  standing  for  the  State." 2 ― 
Faith  is  the  most  important  of  all. 

1  Analrctx  XV,  8. 

2  Analects  XII,  7. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  fonfucius. 


Now,  if  a  State  has  no  food,  so  that  the  people  must  starve, 
they  care  no  more  for  propriety  and  righteousness.  Those  being 
neglected,  how  can  confidence  still  be  maintained? 

It  has  been  said  that,  as  long  as  the  granaries  are  full,  people 
observe  the  rules  of  propriety,  and  that,  while  they  have  sufficiency 
of  clothing  aiul  food,  they  know  what  honour  and  shame  is. 
Charity  is  the  upshot  of  abundance,  and  mutual  fighting  the  result 
of  privation.  No、v,  provided  that  there  is  nothing  to  live  on,  how 
could  faith  lie  preserved'.' 

During  the  Ch  un-cliiu  period  the  contending  States  were 
famine-stricken.  Peo[)le  t  lianged  their  sons  in  order  to  eat  them, 
and  broke  their  bones  for  fuel  to  cook  with.1  Starving  and  without 
food,  tliey  had  no  tim*»  to  trouble  about  kindness  or  justice.  The 
love  between  lather  and  son  is  baaed  on  faith,  yet  in  times  of 
famine  faith  is  thrown  away,  and  the  sons  are  used  as  food.  I  low- 
could  Confucius  tell  Tsc  Kung  that  food  might,  be  foregone,  but  that 
faith  ouglit  to  be  preserved ？  If  there  is  no  faitli,  but  food,  though 
unsought,  faith  will  grow,  wliercas,  if  tliere  is  no  food,  but  faitli, 
it  cannot  be  upheld,  though  we  may  strive  for  it. 

When  the  Master  went  to  Wei,  Jan  Yu2  acted  as  driver  of 
】iis  carriage.  The  Master  observed,  How  numerous  are  the  people ！ " 
Jan  Yu  said: ― "  Since  they  are  so  numerous,  what  more  could  be 
done  for  thein?" ― "  Enrich  them,"  was  the  reply. 一- "And  when  they 
have  been  euriched,  what  more  could  be  done? " ― The  Master  said: 
" Teacli  them."3 ― Speaking  with  Jan  Yu.  ( 'onfuc'ms  placed  wealth  first 
and  instruction  after,  but  lie  told  Tse  Knng  tliat  food  might  be 
dispensed  with,  provided  there  was  faith.  What  difference,  is  there 
between  food  and  wealth,  i'aith  and  instruction.'  Both  scholars 
received  different  answers.  The  object  prized  most  was  not  tlie 
same  in  both  cases.  Tlie  opinions  of  ( 'onfuciu.s  about  political 
economy  cannot  have  been  very  well  settled. 


Chil  Po  Yil 4  sent  a  messenpjer  to  ('mtfucius,  who  questioned 
him  、、- hat  his  master  was  doing.  The  ""'sst'ngt'r  rq"ied,  "  My 
master  is  anxious  to  make  his  faults  few,  but  cannot  succeed." 


1  Cf.  p.  159. 

*  A  disciple  of  Confuchu. 
»   Analects  XIU,  9. 

*  A  disciple  of  ( 'onfunw  in  Wei,  with  whom  he  lodged.    After  Confucius' 
return  to  Lu,  lie  sent  tlie  messenger  to  make  friendly  inquiries. 


Digitized  by  Google 


411 


Lnn-Hcng:  E.  Criti«jue. 


He  tlicn  went  out,  and  Confucius  said,  "This  messenger!  This 
messenger! " ， 

This  is  a  reproach.  Those  discussing  the  Analects  hold  that 
Confucius  reproves  him  for  his  humility  on  behalf  of  another.2 

Confucius  inquired  of  the  mossengor  what  his  master  was  doing, 
he  asked  about  liis  business,  not  about  his  conduct.  The  messenger 
ought  to  have  replied  to  this  question  of  Confucius ： ― "  My  master 
does  such  and  such  a  thing,"  or,  "  is  occupied  with  such  and  such 
a  government  affair,"  instead  of  saying: ― "My  master  is  anxious  to 
make  his  faults  lew,  but  cannot  succeed."  How  do  we  know  but 
that  in  his  reply  he  missed  the  point  of  the  question,  and  that  it 
was  to  this  that  Confucius  took  exception?  What  did  Confucius  really 
reproach  the  messenger  for'.'  Because  he  spoke  liumbly  on  another's 
behalf,  or  because  in  his  reply  he  missed  the  point'.' 

The  blame  referred  to  something  definite,  but  Confucius  did 
not  make  clear  his  fault  merely  saying  ： ― "  This  messeuger  ！  This 
messenger! "  In  later  ages  people  began  to  have  their  doubts  as 
to  vvliercin  tlie  raessciiger  had  failed.  Han  Fei  Tse  says: 一 "If  tlie 
style  be  too  terse,  it  will  prove  a  cause  of  dispute  for  the  disciples." 
How  concise  is  Confucius'  remark: ― "This  messenger! " 

Some  say  that  the  idea  of  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn  "3  was 
to  keep  a  respectful  silence  on  the  faults  of  worthies,  that  Cful  Po 
Yii  was  such  a  、、- ortliy,  and  that  therefore  tlie  same  practice  was 
observed  with  regard  to  his  messenger. 

If  one  wants  to  know  a  person  one  must  look  at  his  friends, 
and  to  know  a  prince  one  must  observe  bis  messengers.  C/til  Po  Yn 
was  not  a  worthy,  therefore  his  messenger  had  his  faults.  The 
idea  of  tlie  "  Spring  and  Autumu "  wa.s  to  cover  the  faults  of 
worthies,  but  also  to  censure  smaller  misdemeanours.*  Now,  if  no 
reproach  was  made,  but  silence  kept,  where  would  the  censuring 
of  minor  offences  come  in?  If  Confucitut  was  anxious  to  keep  silence 
on  ( 'liii  l*o  Yu.  he  ouglit  to  have  kopt  quiet,  but  since  he  said 
with  inucli  patlios:— This  raessenger!  This  messenger!  all  his 
coniemporaries  must  have  understood  the  blame.  How  could  sucli 
utterances  serve  tlie  purj)ose  of  a  respectful  silence. 

1  AnaUds  XIV,  2R. 

4  Tliis  ma\  Imve  be«M»  the  view  of  the  old  roinmcntators  at  Wan^  Chung's 
time.  Chu  I  hi,  on  tlie  contrary,  holds  that  the  reply  of  tlio  messenger  was  admirable, 
nnd  that  tlie  laconic  utterance  of  ( 'on/urhut  contains  a  praise,  not  a  reproach. 

s  S.'o  p.  4(X)  Note  1. 

4  Cf.  ahove  p.  4(10. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Confucius. 


415 


K  Hsi 1  inviting  him  to  visit  him,  the  Master  was  inclined  to 
go,  Tse  Lu  was  displeased,  and  said:—"  Master,  formerly  I  have 
beard  you  say,  '  When  a  man  in  his  own  person  is  guilty  of  doing 
evil,  a  superior  man  will  not  associate  with  him.'  A'  Hsi  is  iu  re- 
bellion, holding  possession  of  Cliung-mao\  if  you  go  to  liira,  what 
shall  be  said?  " ― The  Master  said,  44  So  it  is.  But  is  it  not  said 
that,  if  a  thing  be  really  hard,  it  may  be  ground  without  being 
made  thin  ？  Is  it  not  said  that,  if  a  thing  be  really  white,  it  may- 
be steeped  in  a  dark  fluid  without  being  made  black  ？ ― Am  I  a 
bitter  gourd ？  How  could  I  be  hung  up  and  uot  eat?"2 

Tse  Lu  quoted  a  former  remark  of  Confucius  to  refute  him. 
Formerly  Confucius  h^d  spoken  those  words  with  the  object  of  in- 
ducing his  pupils  t6  act  accordingly.  Tse  Lu  quoted  it  to  censure 
Confucius.  He  was  well  aware  of  it,  but  did  not  say  that  his  former 
words  were  a  joke  meaning  nothing,  which  could  be  disregarded. 
He  admitted  that  he  had  spoken  those  words,  and  that  tliey  must 
be  carried  out,  but  "  is  it  not  said,"  he  continued  "  that,  if  a  tiling 
be  really  hard,  it  may  be  ground  without  being  made  thin,  or  if 
it  be  white,  that  it  may  be  steeped  in  a  dark  fluid  without  being 
made  black?"  Could  he  invalidate  Tse  Lu's  objections  with  these 
words?  "  When  a  man  in  liis  own  person  is  guilty  of  doing  evil, 
a  superior  man  will  not  associate  with  him."  To  invalidate  this 
objection  Pi  Hsi  ought  not  yet  to  have  committed  any  evil,  so  that 
oue  might  still  associate  with  him.  However  Confucim  said  that 
what  was  hard,  might  be  ground  without  becoming  thin,  and  what 
was  white,  might  be  steeped  in  a  dark  fluid  without  turning  black. 
According  to  this  argument  those  wliose  conduct  was,  so  to 
speak,  perfectly  hard  or  perfectly  white,  might  consort  with  Pi  Hsi, 
but  why  not  those  superior  men,  whose  ways  are  soft  and  easily 
tainted  by  wickedness? 

Confucius  would  not  drink  the  water  from  the  44  Robber  Spring," 
and  Tsing  Tse  declined  to  enter  into  a  village  called  "  Mother's 
Defeat."3  They  avoided  the  evil,  and  kept  aloof  from  pollution, 
out  of  respect  for  the  moral  laws  and  out  of  shame  at  the  dis- 
graceful names.  "  Robber  Spring  "  and  "  Mother's  Defeat  "  were 
nothing  but  empty  names,  but  nevertheless  were  shunned  by 
Confucius  and  7:—  Tse.     f'i  I  hi  had  done  some  real  wrong,  yet 

1  A  liigt)  officer  in  tlie  service  of  x)w.  C/uio  I'miiily  in  tlie  f'hin  State,  who  took 
possession  of  ( 'hung-muo,  a  cit)  in  Honan,  in  the  ('h"i、g-t,:  prefecture,  for  himself. 
a  Analects  XVII,  7. 

8  Cf.  Hwi  Aon  Tse  XVI,  13  who  adds  that  Mr  Ti，  who  condemned  music, 
would  u<>t  enter  into  a  city  named  "  Morning  Song." 


Digitized  by  Google 


116 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


Confucius  intended  visiting  him.  That  he  did  not  like  the  "  Robber 
Spring  "  was  correct,  but  that  he  wished  to  open  up  relations  with 
Pi  I  hi  was  wrong. 

" Riches  and  honours  acquired  by  unrighteousness  are  to  me 
as  a  floating  cloud." 1  If  Confuch",  wlio  said  so,  liad  taken  the 
wrong  way,  and  lived  on  tlic  salary  paid  him  by  a  rebel,  his  words 
about  floating  clouds  would  have  been  futile. 

Perliaps  lie  wanted  to  propagate  his  doctrine  for  a  time  only. 
【f  that  was  his  aim,  hv  could  meet  the  objections  of  Tse  Ln  by 
speaking  of  the  propagation  of  his  doctrine,  but  not  by  speaking 
of  food.  There  might  be  allowed  some  time  for  the  propagation 
of  his  doctrine,  but  there  would  be  none  for  his  outlook  for  foo«l. 

In  the  words ： ― "Am  I  a  hitter  gourd?  How  rould  I  be  liung 
up,  and  not  eat "  Ctmfucim  compares  himself  to  a  gourd,  saying 
that  being  in  office  a  man  must  live  on  his  salary.  "  I  am  no  gourd 
that  might  be  hung  up,  and  would  require  no  food."2  This  is  a 
rebuff  to  Tse  Lu,  but  this  rejoinder  of  Confiwiiis  does  not  dispose 
of  Tse  Lu\s  objection,  ibr  in  criticising  tlie  master  Tse  Lu  does  not 
assert  that  he  ought  not  to  take  office.  But  lie  should  choose  a 
proper  State  to  live  in.  By  the  above  comparison  Confttdm  showed 
that  liis  only  wisli  was  to  comfortably  eat  his  bread.  How  un- 
dignified is  such  an  utterance  ！  Why  must  he  compare  himself 
with  an  official  who  wants  to  eat?  A  gentleman  must  not  speak 
like  that. 

It  would  make  little  difference,  whether  one  speaks  of  being 
liung  up  like  a  gourd  without  eating,  or  of  being  liung  up  out  of 
employ.  In  reply  to  Tse  Lu  he  might  have  retorted  "  Am  I  a  gourd 
to  be  hung  up,  and  out  of  employ?"  Now  speaking  of  food  Con- 
fucius admits  that  he  sought  office  not  fof  tlie  sake  of  his  doctrine, 
but  merely  to  find  food,  ln  taking  of  lice  the  motive  of  men  is  their 
thirst  for  money,  but  giving  it  a  moral  aspect  they  say  that  they 
do  it  to  propagate  their  principles.  Likewise  in  marrying  the  motive 
is  lust,  but  morally  speaking  it  is  to  serve  the  parents.  If  an  official 
bluntly  speaks  of  liis  food,  would  a  bridegroom  also  own  to  his 
sensuality? 

The  utterance  of  ( 'onf twins  explains  his  feelings.  The  meaning 
is  unmista1val)le,  and  not  obscured  by  a  well  sounding  moral  name. 
It  is  very  common,  and  unworthy  of  a  superior  man.   The  Literati 


1  AnalecU  VII,  15. 

2  Leffffe  and  some  commentators  take  the  words 而 不 食 in  a  paftsive 
sense  "  How  could  I  be  hung  up  and  not  be  eaten?  "  ».  e.  "  not  be  employed." 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  f'onfucius. 


417 


say  that  Confitcius  travelled  ahout  to  find  ernployincnt,  but  did  not 
succeed,  and  regret tetl  that  his  doctrine  did  not  spread  31cthiiika 
tliey  misuDderetand  Omfiicius'  character. 


Kung  Shan  Fu  Jao,  when  ho  was  holding  Pi, 1  and  in  an  attitude 
of  rebellion,2  invited  the  Master  to  visit  him,  who  was  rather  in- 
clined to  go.  Tse  Lu  said  ： ― fck  Indeed  you  rannot  go !  Why  must 
you  think  of  going  to  see  Kuntf  ^/mn  ！ "  The  MasttT  said,  "  (、an  it 
be  without  some  reason  that  he  lias  invitrd  me?  If  any  one  fiiiploy 
me,  may  I  not  make  an  eastern  Chou'i  '*3 ― Making  an  castiTn  ( 'hmt 
means  that  lie  intended  putting  forth  his  doctrine.4 

Kung  Shan  Fu  Jao  and  Pi  ! h'i  were  both  in  rebellion.  With  tlie 
former  he  hoped  to  introduce  his  doctrine,  whereas  from  the  latter 
he  expected  food.  So  his  uttrrarices  are  wavering,  and  his  actions 
are  consequently  iuconMistent.  Shotild  this  porliapjs  have  been  th,、 
reason  of  liis  migrations  and  his  inability  to  find  employment? 

" Ymtg  Huo  wanted  to  see  Con/wkts,  but  he  did  not  see  him."  • 
He  offered  him  a  post,  but  ( 'onfuciiis  would  not  have  it.  Tliat  was 
disinterested  indeed  ！  When  Kung  Shan  Fu  .hw  and  I'i  1 1  si  invited 
him,  he  was  inclined  to  go.  That  was  \ory  base  ！  Knng  Sfian  Fu 
Jao  and  Yang  IIuo  botli  rebelled,  and  kept  Chi  Hu/in  Tse  prisoner. 
They  were  equal  in  their  wickedness,  and  both  invited  Onfuc'im  in 
the  same  polite  way.  However  (hufncius  responded  to  Kung  Shan 
Fu  .loo' s  call  aud  did  not  see  Yang  lino.  Was  Ktmy  Shan  Fu  Jao  still 
a  fit  person  to  associate  with,  and  yT(mg  lino  not  ？  Tse  Tai  remons- 
trated against  Kuug  Shan  Fu  Jatt's  invitation.  Confucius  ouijht  to  have 
removed  this  objection  by  showing  that  lie  wixs  as  good  at  least 
as  Pi  lid,  and  that  his  character  was  not  so  very  bad. 

1  A  city  in  Shantung. 

3  Kung  Shan  Fu  Jao  and  Yamj  IIuo  combinnd  were  holding  their  liege,  Prince 
Huan  of  CM,  imprisoned,  and  trying  to  arrogate  the  supreme  power  of  the  State  of  Im. 
， AnaUct*  XVII,  5. 

*  The  eastern  (  ftou  dynastv  770-255  owes  its  name  to  its  capital  / 力 -yi—， 
where  it  had  removed  from  llao-cfung  in  the  West  {S/iensf).  The  coiiuiieucement  of 
the  Eastern  Chou,  prior  to  the  civil  ware,  was  felicitous. 

5  Analects  XVII，  1. 


Lmi-llrng.  37 

Digitized  by  Google 


41S 


Lan-Hpng:  E.  Critique. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
Censures  on  Mencius  (T'se  M^ny). 

[When  Mencius  went  to  see  King  Hut  of  Liang,1  the  king  said, 
" You  have  not  counted  it  far  to  come  here,  a  distance  of  a  thousand 
Li,  Sir.  By  what  could  you  profit  my  kingdom ?  " 一 Menciiis  replied, 
" I  have  nothing  but  benevolence  and  justice.  Why  must  Your 
Majesty  speak  of  profit?  ,'2】 

Now,  there  are  two  kinds  of  profit,  the  one  consisting  in 
wealth,  the  other  in  quiet  happiness.  King  Hui  asked,  how  he 
could  profit  his  kingdom.  How  did  Memntts  know  that  lie  did  not 
want  the  profit  of  quiet  happiness,  and  straightway  take  exception 
to  tlie  profit  by  wealth? 

The  Yiking  says,  "  It  will  be  advantageous  to  meet  witli 
the  great  man."3  "It  will  be  advantageous  to  cross  tlie  great 
stream."  ， 一 "  Cliien  represents  what  is  great  and  originating,  pene- 
trating, ndvanUtgfom^  correct  and  firm." 5  And  the  Shtiking  re- 
marks that  black-haired  people  still  esteem  profit.8  They  nil 
liave  the  profit  of  quiet  happiness  in  view.  By  practising  bene—*f 
volence  and  justice,  one  may  obtain  tliis  profit. 

Mmcitis  did  not  say  that  he  inquired  of  King  H".i,  what  he 
meant  by  profiting  his  kingdom.  Had  King  Hui  said:  —  '4  The  profit 
of  wealth,"  Meucim  might  have  given  him  the  proper  answer.  But 
though  he  did  not  know  tlie  purport  of  King  Hms  cjuestion, 
Meticius  at  oni-e  replit-d  about  the  profit  of  wealth.  Had  King  Hui 
really  inquiml  about  it,  Afenctus  adduced  nothing;  in  support  of 
his  view.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  lie  had  asked  about  the  profit 
of  quiet  hapjHness,  and  Mcndm  in  his  reply  had  spoken  about  the 

1  Mencius  I,  Pt.  1,  1.  For  the  ((uotations  from  Mencius  I  adopt  Leyge't  render- 
ings, ns  far  as  possible. 

a  This  interview  took  plact:  in  333  b.c.  Liang  was  the  capital  of  tlie  Wri 
State,  the  modern  lk'ai-ft'ng-fu. 

»   Yiking  Uk.  I，  1,2.  '  ♦ 

*   Yiking  Bk.  I,  V，  1. 

6  Yiking  Bk.  I,  I，  1.  L'.gg"  translation  (Sacred  Hooks  of  the  East  Vol.  XVI), 
p.  57  and  67. 

8  Shuking  Pt.  V,  Bk.  XXX,  G. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Censures  on  Menciiw. 


419 


profit  of  wealth,  lie  would  have  failed  to  give  the  prince  the  proper 
answer,  and  would  not  have  acted  in  the  proper  way. 

[The  king  of  C'hri  asked  Shi  Tse1  saying,  "I  wish  to  give 
Mencim  a  house,  somewhere  in  the  middle  of  the  kingdom,  and  to 
support  his  disciples  with  an  allowance  of  10,000  chung^  that  all 
the  officers  and  the  people  may  have  such  an  example  to  reverence 
and  imitate.  Had  you  not  better  tell  him  this  for  me?  " ― Shi  Tse 
conveyed  this  message  to  Mencius  through  Ch'M  Tse?  Mencius  said, 
" How  should  Shi  Tse  know  that  this  cannot  be?  Suppose  that  I 
wanted  to  be  rich,  having  formerly  declined  100,000  doing,  would 
my  now  accepting  10,000  be  the  conduct  of  one  desiring  rii-lios?  "]4 

In  declining  100,000  chung  Mencius  was  wrongly  disinterested, 
for  wealth  and  honour  is  what  man  desires.  Only  he  does  not 
stick  to  them,  if  he  cannot  obtain  them  in  the  proper  way.5  There- 
fore in  the  matter  of  rank  and  salary  an  honest  man  sometimes 
declines,  and  sometimes  not,  but  why  should  he  reject  a  present, 
which  he  ought  to  have  taken,  on  the  plea  that  he  does  not  covet 
wealth  or  honour? 

[Ch'^n  Chin6  asked  Mencius  saying,  "  When  you  were  in  Ch  i, 
the  king  sent  you  a  present  of  100  t/i1  of  tlie  double  metal,8  and 
you  refused  to  accept  it.  When  you  were  in  Sung,  70  yi  were  sent 
to  you,  which  you  accepted  ；  and  when  you  were  in  Hsieh,9  50  yi 
were  sent,  which  you  likewise  accepted.  If  your  declining  to 
accept  the  gift  in  the  first  ca«e  was  right,  your  accepting  it  in 
the  latter  oases  was  wrong.  If  your  accepting  it  in  tlic  latter  cases 
was  right,  your  declining  to  do  so  in  the  first  case  was  wrong. 
You  must  accept,  Master,  one  of  thi'sc  alternatives." ― Mencius  said, 
" I  did  right  in  all  the  case*.  Wlien  I  was  in  Sung,  I  was  about 
to  take  a  lon^  journey.  Tnivellc-rs  must  be  provided  with  wliat 
is  necessary  for  tlieir  expenses.  The  prince's  message  was,  'A 
present  to  defray  travelling  expenses.'  Wliy  should  I  liavc  declined 
the  gift:'  Wlien  I  was  in  H'sieJ"  I  was  apprelu'nsive  of  my  safety, 
and  taking  measures  for  my  protection.   The  inessa«;e  was  '  I  have 

1  An  officer  of  Chi. 

%  A  chung  is  an  ancient  measure.  As  to  its  capacity  opinions  differ.  1(X)  (XX) 
chung  of  rice  was  the  customary  allowance  of  a  minister  in  a  feudal  State. 

8  A  disciple  of  Mencius,  his  full  name  being  <  h  >'n  (，，、in.    See  below. 

*  Menchu  II，  Pt.  II,  10. 
s  See  above  p.  395. 

6  The  same  as  Ch'm  Tk. 

7  One  yi  was  about  24  taols. 

•  Double  silver  "  worth  twice  as  much  a.s  the  ordinary  "  (Legge). 

9  A  small  principality  in  the  south  of  Shantung. 

'27' 


Digitized  by  Google 


420 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


heard  that  you  are  taking  measures  to  protect  yourself,  and  send 
this  t(»  help  yoti  in  procuring  arms.  Wliy  should  I  have  declined  the 
gift?  But  when  1  was  in  I  had  no  occasion  for  momy.  To  send 
a  man  a  gift,  when  he  lias  no  occasion  for  it,  is  to  bribe  liim.  How 
is  it  possible  that  an  liont-st  man  should  be  taken  witli  a  bribe?  "j1 

Wlietlior  mom»y  oflTeml  ;w  a  gift  can  bv  accepted  or  not,  al- 
ways de|H'ii(ls  on  sonic  roason.  W  e  arc  not  cm  et')us，  if  we  accept 
it,  nor  are  \vc  not  o<»vetous,  if  we  do  not  ai-wpt  it.  Tl"、ic  ar«i 
certain  rules,  wliy  motley  can  be  taken,  and  why  not,  and  there 
arc  likewise  certain  principles  on  wliicli  a  house  tan  be  accepti'd 
or  not.  Now,  Meucius  does  not  say  that  lie  (loos  not  deserve  it,  ami 
that  it  would  not  be  riglit  lor  him  as  a  non-oi'ficial  to  take  the  house, 
Imt  lie  replies  that  ho  is  not  caving  for  wealth,  and  adduces  the 
100,000  chung  which  he  had  declined  on  a  former  occasion  to  draw  a 
conclusion  in  regard  to  the  .suhsccjuont  10,000  chung.  Formerly  lie 
ought  to  liavo  accepted  the  100,000,  how  could  he  decline  them? 

【/'V",/  Kern f 2  asked  Mmdns  saying,  "  Is  it  not  an  extravagant 
prowdure  to  go  from  (""、  prince  to  another,  and  live  upon  them, 
ibl lowed  by  several  tens  oi%  carriage,  and  attended  by  several 
liuntlnnl  men.'  Mcncii^  replied,  "  If  there  be  uot  a  proper  ground 
for  taking  it,  a  single  bamboo-cup  of  rice  may  not  be  received 
from  a  muii.  If  tliorr  be  sucli  a  proprr  ground,  then  S/um's  receiv- 
ing tlie  empire  from  Yao  is  not  to  be  considered  excessive."]3 

■II"、v  can  the  receiving  of  the  empire  from  Yao  be  put  on  a 
level  with  the  acct'iitance  of  100,000  c/iung  *  Shuu  did  not  decline 
tl»e  empire,  because  then?  、va«  a  proper  ground.  Now  Meucius  does 
not  contend  tliat  for  receiving  100,000  chung  there  is  no  proper 
cause,  but  he  says  tliat  he  is  not  greedy  of  wealth  and  honour. 
That  is  not  the  right  modesty,  and  it  eoulil  not  be  an  example 
for  others. 


4  [S/im  T  nng,h  on  his  own  impulse,  a^ked  Mencius,  saying, 
" May  Yen  be  smitten?  "  Mencins  replied,  "  It  may.    Tse  K'tiei6  had 

1  Menchu  II，  Pt.  II，  3. 

a  P'eng  Kvng  waa  a  disciple  of  Mmchu. 

， Mencttu  UI,  Pt.  II,  4. 

*  Mencitu  D,  Pt.  H,  8. 

s  A  high  officer  of  CKi. 

6  Tse  ICuei,  King  of  Ve»,  a  silly  man,  had  ceded  his  throne  to  bis  minister 
Tse  Chih,  hoping  that  the  latter  would  decline  the  offer,  but  he  unexpectedly  accepted, 
and  Tse  Kuei  lost  liis  throne.  During  tlie  troubles  caused  in  Yen  by  Tut  iCuet* 
son  seeking  to  recover  the  kingdom,  tlie  Ch'i  State  made  an  ansuccessfiil  attempt  to 
conquer  Yen.    Sht'n  T'ung  had  asked  Mencius'  advice  about  ail  invasiou  of  】V»> 


Digitized  by  Google 


Censures  on  Mencius. 


421 


no  right  to  give  Yen  to  another  man,  and  Tse  ( 'hiJi  had  uo  right 
to  receive  Yen  from  Tse  hi' mi.  Suppose  tlu*re  were  an  olTicer  here, 
with  whom  you,  Sir.  were  pleased,  and  that,  without  informing 
the  king,  you  were  privately  to  give  to  him  your  salary  and  rank; 
and  suppose  that  this  officer,  also  without  the  King's  orders,  were 
privately  to  receive  tl"'m  froi"  you:  -would  such  a  transaction  be 
allowable'.'  And  where  is  tlif  dillerenre  between  the  case  of  Yen 
and  this  :' ，， 

The  people  of  Ch  i  smote  Yen.  Some  one  •  asked  of  Mencius, 
"Is  it  really  the  case  that  you  advised  Ch  i  to  smite  Yen*  " ― He 
replied,  "  No.  Slien  T  uny  asked  me,  whether  Yen  might  be  smitten, 
and  I  answered  him,  '  It  may.'  They  accordingly  went  and  smote 
it.  If  lie  had  asked  me,  k  Wlio  may  smite  it?  ，，  I  would  have 
answ  ered  him,  4  He  who  is  the  minister  of  Heaven  1  may  smite  it.' 
Suppose  the  rase  of  a  murderer,  and  that  one  asks  me,  4  May  this 
man  be  put  to  death?  '  I  will  answer  him,  4  lie  may.'  If  he  ask 
me,  k  Who  may  put  him  to  death '/ '  1  will  answer  liiin,  *  The 
chief  criminal  judge  may  put  him  to  death.'  But  now  with  one 
y<?n2  to  smite  another  Yen ― liow  should  I  have  advised  this? ，，] 

One  might  ask  whether  Mencius  did  not  really  advise  tlie 
king  to  smite  Yen.  When  S/u!n  T  uug  inquired,  whether  Yen  could 
be  sirlitten,  he  had  his  own  designs,  and  wished  to  smite  it  him- 
self. Knowing  that  he  would  be  very  pleased  witli  the  reply, 
Mencius  ought  to  have  answered  that,  although  Yen  could  be  smitten, 
it  could  not  be  done  but  by  the  minister  of  Heaven.  Tlien  Shm 
T'uny's  plans  would  have  collapsed,  and  his  intention  of  smiting 
Yen  been  given  up.  If  Mencim  was  not  aware  of  tliese  designs, 
and  straightway  made  a  reply,  he  did  not  pay  attention  to  what 
he  said,  and  (lid  not  understand  words. 

3 [Kung  Sun  C/tou*  inquired  of  Mencius,  "I  venture  to  ask 
wherein  you,  Master,  excel'.'  ，，  Mencius  replied,  "  I  understand 
words."— The  other  pursued,  "And  what  do  you  mean  by  saying 
that  you  undorstand  words?  "  MenciiLi  said,  "  When  words  are 
one-sided,  I  know  how  the  mind  of  the  speaker  is  clouded  over; 
when  they  are  extravagant.  I  know  liow  tht*  mind  is  iallen  and 
sunk;  when  they  arc  depraved,  I  know  liow  the  mind  lias  departed 
from  principle,  and  when  thoy  are  evasive,  1  know  how  the  mind 

1  A  man  entrusted  by  Heaven  with  the  execution  of  its  designs. 

3  The  one  】'《i  is  Chi,  which  was  not  better  than  Yen,  and  therefore  not  fit 
to  punish 】>n  as  Heaven's  delegate. 

»  Mencim  II，  Pt.  I,  2. 

4  A  disciple  of  Menciux. 


Digitized  by  Google 


422  Lun-H^iig:  E.  Critique. 

is  at  its  wits'  end.  These  evils  growing  in  the  mind,  do  injury 
to  government,  and,  displayed  in  the  government,  are  hurtful  to 
the  conduct  of  a  flairs.  Should  a  Sage  again  arise,  he  would  un- 
doubtedly follow  my  words.' 1 

Menchts  understood  words  and  also  knew,  how  a  warning  as 
to  the  catastrophe  which  S/it'n  T  tiny  was  bringing  about,  would 
after  all  have  been  to  his  benefit.  From  the  nature  of  the  question 
lie  must  have  known  tlio  desire  implied  in  the  words  of  S/i/n  T  ung. 
Knowing  his  aims,  he  must  have  had  an  idea  of  the  disaster,  in 
which  the  thing  was  doomed  to  end. 


Mencim  said,1  ["It  would  be  for  the  happiness  of  the  people 
of  tlie  wliolt'  empire.  1  hope  that  the  king  will  cliange.  I  am 
daily  hoping  for  tliis."] 

Was  tlie  king  wliom  Mencim  left,  the  same  on  whom  he  did 
not  wait  at.  court  tbnnerly'.'2  Why  <li<l  he  think  so  little  of  him 
first,  and  make  so  much  ol*  liini  afterwards?  Had  it  not  been  tlie 
former  king,  he  would  not  have  abandoned  him.  If  he  quitted 
him  later  on,  the  sc(M)iul  king  must  have  been  worse  than  the  first. 
When  lie  left  tlie  king,  and  stopped  three  days  in  Chou,3  it  was 
a  less  drastic  measure  than  his  not  going  to  court,  and  staying 
with  Cliing  C/i  ou.*  Wliy  w  as  liis  Uchaviour  not  identical  in  tlie 
two  instances?  Why  did  ho  not  treat  tlie  kiug  in  the  same  manner 
in  both  cases ？ 

W  hen  Mmcius  was  in  Lu,  Duke  V  ing  of  Lu  \va«  about  to 
pay  hiin  a  call,  but  In8  favourit**  Tsnng  Ts  nng  slandered  Metuhts, 
and  stojiped  him.  Yo  Clu'-ng  l\seh  told  Mmciits  about  it,  who  said,fi 
["A  man's  advancemtMit  is  d;t<Ml,  it  may  be,  by  others,  and  the 
stopping  him.  may  be,  from  the  fllbrts  ol'  others.  But  to  advance 
a  man  or  to  stop  his  ad vance  is  really  beyond  tin*  power  of  men. 
My  not  meeting  with  the  prim'c  of  Lu  is  from  l】（'aveu."】 

1  Jlencius  II,  Pt.  II，  12. 

3  The  King  of  (  hi  wished  to  rail  on  him  at  roiirt,  inforiiiitig  him, 

that  he  intended  waiting  upon  Menciut  liiniHelf,  but  had  got  a  cold,  and  could  nut 
go  out.  Mfncitis  knew  tliis  to  be  a  pretence,  and  therefore  declined  to  go  to  court 
on  tlie  pretence  that  lie  wa.s  unwell  likewise.  Cf.  jVew  iux  II,  Pt.  II,  2.  Tlie  king  and 
tlie  philosoplicr  were  both  too  jealous  of  their  dignity  to  pet  along  well. 

*  A  small  place  in  C'h'i,  where  Men''""  halted,  expecting  to  be  called  back. 

1  Ah  officer  of  ('h' ；、  with  whom  Menaus  stayed,  while  the  king  was  waiting 
for  him,  at  the  former  occasion. 

s   A  disr;ji]e  of  Mencius. 

r'   Menchts  I，  Pt.  II，  1(3. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Censures  on  Mencitis. 


423 


First  lie  did  not  find  favour  with  the  prinr.e  of  Lu  and  after- 
wards with  that  of  ('M  i.  There  was  no  (lifloroiice.  But  in  the 
first  instance  he  held  I  lea  von  alone  ac<"ountable,  in  the  second,  the 
king.  Tliere  is  no  stability  in  his  reasoning.  When  the  king  of 
(It'i  disdained  his  services,  anil  he  did  not  advance,  some  fellow 
like  Tsang  'jVnuff  must  have  slandered  him.  That  was  likewise 
stopping  or  keeping  back,  but  in  both  cases  it  was  Heaven's  tlecrce 
that  lie  should  not  find  employment,  and  beyond  the  power  of  men. 
Why  then  did  lie  still  linger  three  days,  when  he  left,  and  not 
go  straight  011?  Provided  it  was  the  fate  of  I  leave  u  that  lie  should 
not  meet  with  the  king  of  <—'l"、  who  would  not  listen  to  his  words, 
could  Heaven  liave  changed  this  fate  within  the  space  of  three 
days,  and  bring  about  the  interview.'  In  Lu  lie  gave  all  the  credit 
to  Heaven,  abandoned  his  schemes,  and  lost  all  hope.  In  Ch  i  he 
counted  solely  on  tlio  king,  and  was  full  of  hopes.  Thus  tlie  mis- 
sing of  one  inttM  view  woul<l  liave  been  merely  the  result  of  in- 
sinuations of  men. 

Some  on«  may  bold  that  Heaven's  fate  could  not  yet  be  settled 
lirst,  aiitl  that  for  this  reason  Menriu><  Itoped  that  within  three  days 
the  king  would  call  him  back.  Tl"8  may  he  so,  supposing  that 
fate  requires  three  days.  But  would,  upon  such  a  supposition,  the 
fact  tliat  the  king  of  Ch  i  first  allowed  liim  to  leavr  not  be  due  to 
fate?  If  it  was  tatc,  and  the  limit  three  days,  then  Duke  P  ing  of 
Lu  might  as  well  after  tlirco  days  time  have,  rejected  Tsnny  Ts  atufs 
proposal,  and  followed  the  advice  of  Yo  ( lieng  Tse,  and  have  called 
on  Mencius.  Wherefore  was  Mencius  so  hasty  in  attributing  every 
thing;  to  Heaven.*  Had  tlie 山 iki'  paid  Mencius  a  visit  witliin  t lire (？ 
days,  how  would  tlie  latter  liave  justilied  his  former  ut'terance? 

'[When  Mencifts  left  Ch  '•，  ClCung  Yil  -  questioned  him  on  the 
way,  saying,  "  MastiT,  you  look  like  one  who  rarries  an  air  of 
dissatisfaction  in  his  couutonanci*.  But  iormerly  1  heard  you  say, 
*  The  8U[)erior  man  does  not  murmur  against  Heaven,  nor  bear  a 
grudge  against  men.'" 

Mrnciu.s  said,  "  That  was  one  time,  and  this  is  ； mother.  It  is 
a  rule  that  a  true  Imperial  sovcrcigii  slioulcl  arist*  in  the  course  of 
five  hundred  years,  and  that  (luriti^  that  time  tlicre  should  be  soint* 
one  illustrious  in  his  jit'in'ratioii.  From  the  comnuMict'meiit  ol'  the 
( 7k nt  dynast v  till  now,  more  than  700  years  have  elapsed.  Judging 
nuiiierically,  the  date  is  passed.    Exainiiiiiig  the  time,  we  might 


«  Menciuif  II,  Pt.  II,  13. 
5  A  follower  of  Mendu*. 


424 


I.un-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


expect  the  rise  of  such  indivi<luals  in  it.  But  Heaven  does  not  yet 
wish  tliat  the  empire  should  enjoy  tranquillity  and  good  order. 
If  it  wislied  tliis,  who  is  tliere  besides  me  to  bring  it  about'.'  How 
should  I  be  otherwise  than  dissatisfied  '.' ] 

What  proof  is  there  for  the  assertion  of  Mcnc'ms  that  in  tlie 
course  of  five  liundred  years  a  true  emperor  should  arise?  77  K'u 
was  such  a  sovereign,  and  Yao  also  ruled  over  the  empire  as  a  true 
sovereign.  Yao  transmitted  tlie  empire  to  Shun,  vvlio  was  likewise 
a  true  emperor.  He  transmitted  the  empire  to  Yil,  who  reigued  in 
the  same  style.  These  four  Sages  were  true  Imperial  sovereigns, 
but  they  followed  one  another  quite  closely. 1  From  Yu  to  T  nny 
there  is  au  interval  of  a  thousand  years  and  from  T' atig  to  Chott 
also.2  W^n  Wnny  commenetHl  the  reign,  and  at  his  death  handed  it 
over  to  Wti  Wang.  When  Wu  Wang  expired,  Cli  eng  Wang  and  Chou 
Kung  together  rult'd  over  the  empire.  From  the  beginning  of  the 
Chou  dynasty  to  the  time  of  Mencius  700  years  again  had  elapsed,3 
but  no  true  emperor  liad  arisen.  In  which  period  do  we  find  then 
that  in  the  course  of  five  liundrcd  years  a  true  sovereign  arises? 
Who  lias  made  this  statement  tliat  there  will  be  a  true  emperor 
every  five  hundred  years?  Mencim  says  something  which  has  no 
foundation  and  no  proof,  and  is  based  on  some  wild  hypothesis. 
Not  liaving  found  favour  with  tlie  king,  he  left  Ch' i,  ami  wore  a 
dissatislied  look.  That  does  not  show  his  wisdom,  and  places  him 
on  a  level  with  ordinary  scholars. 

Five  hundred  years  is  considered  the  period  in  which  Heaven 
produces  a  Sage.  Moreover,  Mencius  says  that  Heaven  did  not  yet 
wish  tliat  the  empire  should  enjoy  tranquillity  and  good  order 
I  lis  idea  is  that,  when  Heaven  is  willing  to  bless  the  empire  with 
tranquillity  and  good  order,  it  must  produce  a  wise  emperor  in 
the  coiirse  of  five  hundred  years.  According  to  what  Mencius  says, 
Heaven  produces  a  Sag*'  on  purpose.    But  are  five  hundred  years 

i  Wang  CKung  omits  Ti  ('hik、  who  followed  his  father  Ti  A"u.  Owing  to 
his  dissolute  life,  he  was  dethroned,  and  his  brother         was  elected  in  his  place. 

1  Those  are  rather  round  numbers.  According  to  the  cointnon  clironology 
3  ti  reigned  from  2205  2197,  T  ang,  tlie  founder  of  the  dynasty  from  1766-1753, 

ami  the  (  hou  dynastv  commenced  in  1122.  Wu  War^'*  reign  lasted  from  1122  1115, 
<  h  >'vg  Wane's  from  1115  107S.  All  these  rulers  arc  regarded  by  the  Chinese  as 
true  emperors.  The  interval  between  】'tf  und  T  any  is  about  400  years,  that  between 
T Hug  and  VW"  Wany  aliout  000  years.  It  is  ditTicult  to  understand  why  Wang  Chuny 
in  botli  oases  、pe.'iks  of  a  thousand  yoars.  The  remark  of  Meticitu  that  every  five 
hundred  years  a  tntv  sovereign  arises,  comes  much  nearer  the  truth. 

3  About  ^»H»  years  in  fact  after  the  usual  clironolo^y.  The  Bamboo  AnnaU 
reduce  tliis  space  to  about  7(K)  years. 


Digitized  by  Google 


f'enmires  on  Mcucius. 


425 


really  tlie  period  within  \vhi<  h  it  |)rodm  e«  a  Sage?  If  so,  why 
tlitl  Heaven  not  send  the  Sage  forth:' -- Herause  it  was  not  the  time 
for  a  wise  emperor  to  arise,  therefore  Heaven  did  not  produce  him. 
•Since  Menciua  believes  in  it  nevertheless,  he  does  not  know  Heaven. 

From  the  commenrement  of  the  C/ion  dynasty  upwards  of  seven 
hundred  years  had  elapsed.  "  .ludgiiig  numerirally,  the  date,  there- 
fore, was  passed,  but  examining  the  time,  it  might  be  possible." 
What  signifies  tbat  the  date  is  passed,  and  wliat,  that  it  is  possible? 
Date  is  equivalent  to  time,  and  time  to  date.  The  date  being  passed, 
five  hundred  years  are.  passed.  From  tin*  beginning  of  the  Chou 
epocli  up  to  that  time  upwards  of  seven  hundred  years  liad  elapsed 
i.  e.  two  hundred  years  in  excess.  Should  an  emperor  ariae  then, 
he  would  already  have  missed  the  proper  time.  Yet  Mencim  avers 
that  considering  the  time,  it  might  be  possible.  What  does  that  mean? 

He  says  that  in  the  course  of  five  hundred  years  a  true  Im- 
perial sovereign  should  arise,  and  further  that  during  that  time 
there  should  be  some  one  illustrious  in  his  generation.  Is  this  some- 
body the  same  as  the  emperor  or  some  one  else?  If  he  is,  why 
iiiention  him  a  second  time,  if  not,  what  sort  of  man  is  it  who  is 
illustrious  in  his  generation'.'  Suppose  the  answer  be: ― 44  men  like 
Confucitts  and  scholars  like  Mencius,  who  will  instruct  the  youth, 
aud  awaken  the  dullards  and  imbeciles,"  then  Con/tuAm  has  already 
lived,  and  Mencim  himself  also  lias  been  born.  Should  we  say: ― 
" wise  ministers,"  they  must  live  contemporaneously  witli  a  wise 
ruler,  and  a  wise  minister  appear,  when  a  wise  emperor  arrises. 

Mencius  s|>eaks  of  five  hundred  years,  but  why  does  he  say 
" (luring  that  time'.1 "  If  lie  does  not  mean  the  spai'e  of  five  hundred 
years,  but  the  time  between,  lie  must  think  of  two  or  three  hundred 
years.  Then  a  Sage  could  not  work  together  with  a  wise  emperor 
arrising  after  five  hundred  years,  whom  then  has  Mencius  in  view, 
saying  that  during  that  time  then'  should  be  some  one  illustrious 
in  his  generation?  "  Heaven,"  says  he,  "(loes  not  yet  wish  that  the 
empire  should  enjoy  tranquillitv  and  good  order.  If  it  wished  this, 
who  is  there  besides  inc  to  bring  it  about?"  Hy  these  words 
Meuc'nts  does  not  intend  saying  that  he  ljimself  ought  to  be  em- 
peror, but  that,  if  tliere  were  an  emperor,  he  would  art  as  Ins 
minister.  Whether  there  be  an  omporor  and  a  minister,  depoiuls 
on  Heaven.  When  fate  did  not  allow  the  empire  to  enjoy  tran- 
quillity and  good  order,  Mtnchis  did  not  acquiesce  with  a  good 
grace  in  Ch  i,  but  resented  it,  and  woro  a  dissatisfied  look.  That 
was  very  wrong  of  him. 


Digitized  by  Google 


I.un-Hong:  E.  Critique. 


l[P  enff  h'eng  asked  Meiicim  saying,  "  Is  it  proper  that  a  scholar 
doing  no  si'rvi'.e  should  rt'«.(Hv*'  support'.' " ― Mencius  answered,  "If 
you  do  not  liave  an  inten-ouimuniration  of  the  productions  of  labour, 
and  an  interchange  of  nu'n's  services,  so  that  one  from  his  overplus 
may  supply  the  deficiency  of  another,  then  husban(imen  will  have 
a  superfluity  of  grain,  and  women  will  have  a  superfluity  of  ,'lotli. 
If  you  liave  such  an  interchange,  carjkenters  and  carriage- w rights 
may  all  get  their  ibod  from  you.  Here  now  is  a  man,  who.  at 
home,  is  filial,  and  abroad,  respei'tful  to  his  elders;  who  watclics 
over  the  principles  ol'  tlie  aru'i«>nt  kings,  awaiting  the  rise  of  future 
learners ― and  vet  you  will  refuse  to  support  him.  How  is  it  that 
you  give  honour  to  the  rar|)enter  and  <•  arri age -w right,  ami  slight 
liirn  who  j>rartises  benevolence  and  righteousness? " 

P  eng  King  said,  "  The  aim  of  the  carpenter  aud  rarriagc-wriglit 
is  to  se«'k  for  a  living.  Is  it  also  the  aim  of  the  superior  mait 
in  his  practice  of  prim'ii 山' s  thereby  to  seek  for  a  living?  " -— ki  What 
have  you  to  do,"  retnnu'd  Mmciu.t,  "  with  It  is  purpose?  lie  is  of 
service  to  you.  He  tlcsorves  to  be  supported,  and  should  be  sup- 
ported.  And  let  me  auk,  '  Do  you  remunerate  a  man's  intention, 
or  do  you  remunerate  his  service.1  To  this  P' 《ng  K^ng  replied, 
" 1  remunerate  his  intention. " 

Meiicim  said,  "  There  is  a  man  lien*,  wlio  breaks  your  tiles, 
and  draws  unsightly  iiiiurcs  on  your  walls: ― his  purpose  may  be 
thereby  to  seek  for  his  living,  but  will  you  indeed  remunerate 
him?  " ― 4i  No,"  said  I'  t'ny  Kh"j、、  and  Mencius  then  concluded,  "That 
being  the  case,  it  is  not  the  purpose  which  you  remunerate,  hut 
the  work  <lone." ― ] 

Mt'ncius  referred  (o  tlie  breaking  of*  tiles  and  disfiguring  of 
walls  with  tho  ob.jcrt  of  i 出 piigtiing  the  remarks  of  V  hig  Keng, 
knowing  very  well  that  lie  who  breaks  tiles  or  disfigures  walls 
does  uo  sorvicps,  but  has  a  jmrjioso,  ami  that  P  ^ng  Keug  under 
no  rinimstaiu'es  would  support  him.  How  rvor,  witli  this  reierence 
to  the  breaking  of  tiles  and  tlisB^urin^  of  walls  Mencitis  cannot 
refutf  l,fm<j  Keny.  because  people  acting  in  this  way  do  not  belong 
to  thos««  wlio  are  seeking  a  living.  Sju'Ii  being  the  case,  tliia  ar- 
gument cannot  be  put,  forward  against  P  ihtg  Kmg.  People  wlio, 
without  a  reason,  are  breaking  tiles  mul  disfiguring  walls,  are  either 
mail,  or  nicrely  playing.  The  j)iirj)ost>  ol'  madmen  is  not  to  seek 
a  living,  and  tliose  who  are  disporting  themselves,  have  not  this 
intention  either. 


1   Mencius  111,  Pt.  U，  I. 


—― - ―  ——       ―  - - 


Digitized  by  Google 


Censures  on  Menciu*. 


427 


From  those  who  soek  a  living  a  groat  many  persons  have 
no  advantage  whatever.  Therd'«"'t、  tliose  wishing  to  support  them- 
selves sell  things  in  the  market  a«  niercliants,  and  live  on  the 
price  wliich  they  receive  iu  exchange  for  their  wares.  Now,  the 
breakers  of  tiles  and  scribblers  jirolit  nobody,  and  cannot  have  this 
intention.  Reasonable  persons  know  that  such  acts  would  profit 
nobody,  and  consequently  desist  tlierefroin.  The  unreasonable  are 
akin  to  madmen,  and  certainly  would  not  li.ive  that  purpose. 

Those  who  break  tiles  and  disfigure  walls,  are  like  boys 
throwing  mud  on  the  road,  or  is  there  auy  diflfereoce?  When  they 
are  dumping  mud  on  the  road,  lmve  they  tlie  intention  of  seeking 
a  living  thereby? ― They  are  still  cliildren,  and  have  no  purpose. 

VVl»en  old  folks  are  playing,  they  behave  like  tlio.se  who  are 
disfiguring  walls.  Have  players  the  intention  to  seek  a  living? 
Players  rob  each  other  of  their  money.  When  the  sums  won  are 
very  high,  they  may  be  used  as  a  livelihood,  and  eventually  there 
may  be  this  intention. 

People  vvlio  throw  stones  and  leap  over  thcin,  an»  also  very 
murli  alike  to  tliose  s<*ribblers.  Is  tlu*  intention  of  those  stone- 
throwers  and  jumpers  dirtn'ted  to  tht'ir  living:'  In  short,  the 
criti<Msins  brought  forward  by  Mendus  against  V  eng  Kmg  are 
not  very  thorough.  If  P' eny  Keng  trusted  in  Mencius'  words,  we 
may  say  that  the  latter  "  put  him  <»ir  witli  groat  smartness  of 
speech."  1 


^[K'uang  Chang  Tse3  said,  "Is  not  Chen  Chung  Tst' 4  a  man  of 
true  self-denying  jmrity.'  He  was  living  in  H '«-////</, 6  and  for  three 
days  was  without  food,  till  lie  «'oul(l  neither  In'ar  nor  see.  Over 
a  、vdl  grew  a  plum  tree,  the  fruit  of  wliich  had  born  more  than 
half-eatrn  by  worms.  He  ,'ra、vl<'(l  to  it,  and  tried  to  eat  ssoine  of 
the  fruit,  "  lien,  after  s\\  allowing  throe  moutliiuls,  he  recovered 
his  sight  and  hearing." 

Mfuchts  replied,  'k Among  the  scholars  of  1  must  reoard 

Ch  en  Chung  Tse  as  the  tliumb  sunonc;  the  fingers.    But  still,  wlirn* 

1  A  (|uotatioii  from  AnaUcts  V，  4，  where  f—'onf'iciwx  coiideuins  such  sinart"ess 
of  speech.  -  -  Wtmy  ( h  uiitf  is  inucli  smarter  liere  tliun  Alemnts.  The  arjiuments 
of  Mencitu*  arc  quite  ri^ht,  and  Want/  Ch  w"y  only  takes  exception  at  the  example 
adduced  by  him,  which  indeed  is  not  very  lucky. 

2  Mencius  III,  I't.  II，  10. 

" A  grandee  of  the  State  of  Chi. 
*  A  recluse. 

1   A  poor  place  in  modem  Chi-nan-fu  (Shuntutig). 


Digitized  by  Google 


428 


Lun-Hong:  K.  Criti«|ue. 


is  tlie  self-denying  purity  he  pretends  to?  To  carry  out  the  prin- 
i\[)k's  which  he  lioltls,  one  must  becoiiu-  an  eartl 卜、 vorm,  Inr  so 
only  <*an  it  be  done." 

" Now,  an  earthworm  eats  the  dry  mould  above,  and  drinks 
from  the  yellow  spring-water  below.  Was  the  house  in  wliirh 
Ch  M  Chwuj  7av  dwelt  built  by  a  J'o  Yi%  1  or  was  it  built  by  a  robber 
like  67«?.' 2  Was  the  millet  which  he  ate  planted  by  a  l、o  Yi,  or 
was  it  planted  by  a  robber  like  (.'W  These  are  things  wliich 
canuot  bo  known." 

" But,"  said  K'uang  Chang  Tse,  "  wliat  does  that  matter"'  He 
liimself  weaves  sandals  of  heni|>,  and  his  wife  twists  hempen  thread, 
to  barter  them." 

Mencitis  rejoined,  "  Ch  fin  Chung  Tse  belongs  to  nn  ancient  and 
noble  family  of  Ch  i.  His  older  brother  Tai  received  from  K'、  a 
revenue  of  10,000  chung^  but  lie  considered  his  brother's  emolument 
to  be  unrighteous,  and  would  not  live  on  it,  and  in  the  same  way 
he  considered  his  brother's  house  to  be  unrighteous,  and  would  not 
dwell  in  it.  Avoiding  bis  brotlier  and  leaving  his  mother,  lie  went 
and  dwelt  in  Wu-ling.  Owe  day  afterwards,  lie  returned  to  their 
Iiouse,  wlien  it  happened  that  some  one  sent  his  brother  a  present 
of  a  live  goose.  He,  knitting  his  brows,  said,  k  What  are  you 
going  to  use  that  ,'a.dding  tiling  for? ' ― By-and-by  his  mother  killed 
the  goose,  and  gave  him  some  of  it  to  eat.  Just  then  his  brother 
came  into  the  houst1,  and  said,  4  It's  tlie  flesli  of  tliat  cackling  thing-,' 
upon  which  he  went  out  and  vomited  it.— Thus,  what  his  mother 
gave  him  lie  would  not  eat,  but  、vhat  his  wile  gives  him  he  eats. 
He  will  not  dwell  in  liis  brother's  house,  but  he  dwells  in  Wu4ing. 
How  can  lie  in  sm'.li  t^inuunstances  i;om|)lete  tlie  style  of  life  whirl i 
he  professes?  With  such  prinoij)les  as  Ch  en  Chung  Tse  holds,  a 
man  must  be  an  earth-worm,  and  then  he  can  carry  them  out."] 

Mfucim  in  reprelieiuling  C/te'n  Chuug  Tse  does  not  hit  his  weak 
point.  When  C'/'V"  Chung  Tse  showed  such  a  disgust  for  tlie  goose, 
that  lie  felt  like  vomiting,  was  it,  because  he  would  oat  nothing 
tliat  came  from  liis  mother?  Previously  already  he  had  expressed 
lii.s  (lispleasute  at  the  goose  saying,  "  What  arc  you  going  to  use 
that  cacklinp,-  thing  for?"  Wlien,  later  on,  liis  mother  had  killed 
it,  aiid  gavo  him  some  to  cat,  and  his  brother  remarked,  "  It's  the 
flesh  of  that  cackling  thing,"  he  felt  ashamed  that  he  was  acting 


1  The  exemplar  of  purity  cf.  j).  1<>8  Note  2  and  below  p.  435. 

2  Cf.  p.  139. 

3  See  above  p.  41 'J  Note  2. 


Digitized  by  Google 


f'ensures  on  Mctnius. 


42!) 


contrary  to  what  he  had  said  before,  and  vomited  it.  Had  his 
brother  not  reminded  him,  he  would  not  have  vomited,  and  he 
would  tlien  liave  eaten  what  his  mother  oirered  him.  Therefore  to 
say  that  he  would  not  eat  anything  coming  from  his  mother  con- 
veys a  wrong  idea. 

Suppose  that  CKm  Chung  Tse  was  dotennined  not  to  eat  any- 
thing from  lu's  mother,  he  ought  not  to  have  eaten  of  tlie  dish  of 
the  goose,  when  it  was  brought.  Now,  after  he  had  rateu  it,  and 
learned  that  it  was  tlie  gooso,  1"'  f«»lt  so  disgusted,  that  lie  vomited 
it.  Thus  tlie  vomiting  was  the  effect  of  his  being  ashamed  that 
he  had  eaten  something  in  opposition  to  his  (leteriuination,  it  was 
no  want  of  aHVrtion  betwrcn  mother  and  son,  nor  a  desire  to  eat 
nothing  that  <  aine  from  liis  mother. 

" But  still  whtTC  is  the  self-denying  purity  Cl"h、  Chung  Tse 
pretends  to'.'  To  carry  out  his  nature,  one  must  become  an  earth- 
worm, for  so  only  can  it  bo  done.  An  eartli-worni  eats  the  dry 
mould  above,  and  drinks  from  the  yellow  spring- water  below." 
That  would  moan  tliat  an  rarth-worni  is  a  paragon  of  purity,  and 
that,  unites  he  was  like  an  cartb-wonn,  he  «-oul(l  not  bo  pure  and 
undcflled.1  Now,  provided  t\u-  house  he  was  dwelling  in  was  built 
by  Po  Yi,  and  the  millet  he  ate  planted  by  \*o  Yi,  his  dwelling  and 
eating  would  be  unstained  purity.  But  perhaps  he  ate  millet  sown 
by  robber  C/i^  or  lived  in  a  cottage  constructed  by  robber  C7<^,  then 
this  circumstarKH?  would  contaminate  his  purity.  These  strictures 
on  Ch  ^n  Chung  Tse  arc  uot  to  the  point  either. 

A  house  is  built  for  man's  sake  to  be  lived  in,  and  sandals 
and  thread  are  bartered  against  inillet.  If  it  really  was  planted 
by  a  robber,  or  the  house  his  building,  at  all  events  Chung  Tse 
had  no  cognisance  of  it.  His  brother's  unrighteousness,  however, 
was  apparent  from  his  coiuliirt.  All  saw  his  actions;  they  were 
quite  notorious  and  commented  upon.  Hence  C/i  t'n  Chung  Tse  retired 
to  Wu-Uuff.  He  did  not  stop  in  liis  brother's  house,  and  by  the 
weaving  of  sandals  and  twisting  of  tliread  obviated  the  nect^sity 
of  living  on  his  salary.  If  Ch  hi  Chung  Tse  stayed  in  Wit-ling,  he 
shunned  the  house  of  that  brother,  and  vomited  his  food.  Because 


1  This  seems  not  to  have  been  the  idea  o( Menciut.  The  tertium  comparaKonu 
is  not  the  purity  of  the  earth-worm,  but  its  independence  and  eelf-snfBciency.  Having 
its  earth  to  eat  and  some  muddy  water  to  drink,  it  has  no  further  needs,  as  man 
has,  who  is  never  quite  independent  of  others.  Unless  he  break  off  all  intercourse 
with  his  fellnw-creatures,  he  cannot  avoid  all  pollution.  Thus  the  commentators  and 
Leyye  understand  the  passage.    Wang  (  'h  ung'*  interpretation  is  forced. 


Digitized  by  Google 


430 


Lun-HAng:  E.  Critique. 


these  things  could  be  heard  with  the  ear  and  seen  with  the  eye, 
and  were  so  public,  that  there  could  be  no  doubt,  it  is  evident 
that  as  a  fact  Ch'Sn  Chung  Tse  neither  stayed  with  his  brother  uor 
partook  of  his  meals. 

Now  he  bad  not  seen  who  was  the  builder  of  his  own  house 
in  Wu4ing,  nor  did  he  know  who  planted  the  millet.  But  how 
could  he  take  the  house,  when  it  was  just  completed,  or  eat  the 
millet,  when  it  was  just  reaped?  These  t-ritii-isms  of  Mencius  go 
too  far. 

The  house  wliere  Cltin  Chung  Tse  was  living,  may  perhaps 
have  been  built  by  the  robber,  ho  that  Ch  ^n  Chung  Tse  would  have 
dwelt  there  without,  knowing  it.  Now  Mencuts  contends  that  "  to 
carry  out  tlie  principles  which  he  holds,  oue  must  become  an  earth- 
worm, for  so  only  can  it  be  done."  But  in  the  earth  underneath 
the  house  of  the  robber  there  are  also  earth-worms.  They  eat  the 
dry  mould  in  the  robber's  house  and  drink  from  the  yellow  spring- 
water  there.  How  then  would  an  earth-worm  meet  the  requirements? 
To  carry  out  the  principles  of  CU  en  Chung  Tse  to  the  satisfaction 
of  Mencim  one  ought  to  he  like  a  fish.  A  fish  swims  in  the  river 
or  the  sea,  and  feeds  upon  their  earth.  No  robber  can  dig  through 
the  sea,  or  heap  up  its  earth. 

Ch  hi  Chung  7:"?  has  done  a  great  wrong,  but  tlie  adverse 
comments  of  Mencius  do  nut  liit  it.  Cli en  Chung  Tse  Ivi't  his  mother, 
and  avoided  his  elder  brother,  to  take  up  his  solitary  abode  in 
Wu-ling  together  with  his  wife.  Because  the  house  of  his  brother 
was  an  unrighteous  liouse,  and  his  income  an  unrighteous  income, 
he  did  not  cart，  to  stay  and  live  with  him,  wliich  was  the  height 
of  self-denying  purity.  However,  when  after  his  emigration  to 
Wu-ling  he  rftunicd  to  wait  upon  liis  mother,  it  was  his  duty  to 
abstain  from  eating  anything  and  leave  again.  When  the  goose 
was  brouglit  in,  tln'rc  must  have  hern  other  food  besides,  all  pre- 
pared by  his  mother.  This  food  wa«  bought  with  his  brother's 
money,  for  it  was  ovitlent  that  his  motlicr  had  not  her  own  private 
millet  whir.li  she  could  have  offered  him.  Then  Ch'Sn  Chung  Tse 
partook  of  Ins  brother's  salary. 

I'o  Yi  rather  than  eat  the  millet  of  Chou 1  died  of  starvation 
below  Shou-yang^  Would  a  meal  of  the  millet  of  Chou  have  defiled 
liis  purity':'    Ch  at  Chumj  l\sc  was  not  like  Po  Yi,  but  be  came  very 


1  Tlie  (  7mw  dynasty  whicli  Po 】V  regarded  as  usurpers  of  tlie  throne  uf  the 
legitimate  empen.rs  uf  the  liouse  of  Sluing. 
3  A  inoant^in  in  Hhetm. 


Digitized  by  Google 


, (""ensures  on  Mencius.  431 

near  him.  Saying  that  one  must  become  an  earth-worm  to  carry 
out  those  principles,  Mencius  uses  a  comparison  wliich  does  not 
justice  to  Ch'4n  Chung  Tse  at  all. 


1  [Mencius  said,  "  There  is  a  destiny  for  every  thing.  Those 
who  act  as  they  ought,  receive  the  natural  destiny.2  Therefore,  be  who 
lias  the  true  idea  of  destiny,  will  not  stand  beneath  a  precipitous  wall. 
Death  sustained  ia  the  discharge  of  one's  duties,  is  the  natural  destiny. 
Death  under  handcufls  and  fetters  is  not  the  natural  destiny."] 

The  meaning  of  these  words  of  Mendm  is  that  a  man  should 
not  run  counter  to  his  allotted  fate.  Through  fair  conduct  he 
obtains  the  natural  destiny,  whereas  with  recklessness  and  per- 
versity he  does  not  receive  the  natural  one.  Accordingly  Heaven's 
decree  would  depend  on  human  actions.3 

Confucius*  did  not  become  an  emperor,  Yen  Yuan  died  pre- 
maturely, 7><?  //<a6  lost  his  eye-siglit,  Po  AVm"  got  leprosy.  Was  the 
conduct  of  these  four  men  not  lair?  Why  did  tliey  not  receive 
the  right  destiny?  Pi  Kan1  was  disemboweled,  Tse  HsH$  waa  cooked, 
Tse  Lu9  pickled.  These  were  the  most  cruel  modes  of  death  on 
earth,  otherwise  painful  than  handcuflis  and  fetters.  If  handcuffs 
and  fetters  are  really  proving  that  the  destiny  of  the.  person  in 
question  is  not  the  right  one,  then  the  conduct  of  Pi  Kan  and 
Tse  Hsil  was  not  fair. 

Man  receives  his  destiny,  and  may  be  doomed  to  be  crushed 
to  death,  or  to  be  drowned,  or  to  be  killed  in  battle,  or  to  be 
burned.  He  may  be  ever  so  conscientious  in  his  dealings  and 
careful  in  his  <loings,  it  is  oi'  no  avail. 

Ton  Kmn</  Kuo  was  sleeping  with  u  hundred  persons  below  a 
mound  of  chan-oal.10  'I  he  charcoal  collapsed,  and  all  the  hundred 


1  Metich^  VII,  Pt.  I,  2. 

， Legge  understands  this  passage  difTercntly. 

3  Wanff  <  h  ung  denotes  by  natural  destiny  somethiiig  dillcrent  from  what 
Mencius  expresses  by  it,  wliicli  explains  his  polemic.  Wang  Ch'uny's  natural  destiny 
is  not  induonccd  by  liumaii  actions,  whereas  the  natural,  right,  or  rurrect  destiny  of 
Menchu  is  the  upshot  of  proper  conduct.    Cf.  p.  1 3S. 

*  Vid.  p.  169. 
»  Cf.  p.  164. 

*  On  Yen  】'uan  and  Po  Aiu  see  p.  165. 
7  Cf.  p.  485  Note  6. 

*  Tae  H»A  or  Wu  Tat  I  hit,  the  same  as  Wu  Yuan  p.  140. 

9  Cf.  p.  165. 

10  Vid.  p.  179. 


Digitized  by  Google 


4：\2 


Lun  -  Hong  ：  E.  Critique. 


people  wer«  killed,  only  Ton  Knang  Kuo  wa«  saved,  because  it  was 
his  destiny  to  be  made  a  marquis.  What  difference  is  there  between 
the  lieaped  up  charcoal  and  the  precipitous  wall?  Provided  that 
one  is  not  doomed  to  be  crushed,  there  may  be  a  collapse,  those 
who  have  the  fate  of  Tou  Kuang  Kuo  will  escape  withal.  "A  man's 
advanccmeut  may  bo  effected  by  others,  and  the  stopping  him  may 
be  from  the  efforts  of  others."  1  lie  wlio  is  to  be  cruslietl,  may 
perhaps  be  induced  to  stand  belo>v  a  wall. 

TI»o  son  of  the  land  lord  into  whoso  cottage  K  nng  Chut 2 
euteretl,  wua  predestinated  to  a  pn'inaturc  death  and  ineaimess. 
Though  lie  was  introduwd  into  the  palace,  he  still  became  a  door- 
keeper. The  not  stan<ling  bd()、、'  a  precipitous  wall  haa  llu*  same 
result  as  K  nng  Chins  carrying  the  diiltl  iuto  the  palace. 

1  Mencius  I，  Pt.  II,  lti. 

2  During  a  tempest  the  Usui  emperor  K  ung  ( 'Ma,  1879-1S4S  b.c,  sought 
shelter  in  a  cottage.  The  landlord  imagined  that  tiie  visit  of  the  son  of  heav  en 
was  a  lucky  augury  for  his  s'ui,  and  that  no  misfortune  would  befall  him  in  future. 
Yet  this  son,  later  on,  doing  carpenter's  work,  accidentally  broke  his  axe,  and  cut 
ofl'  his  two  legs.  lie  tlien  became  a  di>orkee|>er,  the  i»nly  office  for  which  he  was 
still  fit  {lAi  Shi  chwi-chiu). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tse.  433 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 
Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tse  {Fei  Han). 

Han  Fei  Tse's 1  system  consists  in  propounding  the  law  and 
making  much  of  success.  Worthies  who  do  not  beneiit  tii»-  State, 
lie  will  not  reward,  and  bad  characters  who  do  not  iuterlVre  with 
the,  administration,  he  does  not  jmnish.  He  grants  nnvards  as  an 
incentive  to  cxtraonlinaiy  actions,  and  he  relies  so  much  on  criminal 
law,  that  he  makes  use  of  capital  puiiislinient.  When  speaking  of 
the  Literati,  he  says  that  they  eat,  but  do  not  s(nv，  and  likens 
tliein  to  voracious  grubs.2  Discussing  th<*  question  of  usefulness, 
he  compares  thvm  with  a  devr  and  a  horse.  A  horse  resembling 
a  deer  letches  a  thousand  r/<m.3  There  are  horses  on  earth  worth 
so  inucli,  but  no  deer  costing  a  thousand  chin.  Deer  are  usclrss, 
horses  are  useful.  The  Literati  are  like  the  deer,  flip  active  oftkials 
like  the  horse.4 

Han  Fei  Tse  knows  vrry  、v,'ll  liow  to  make  use  of  tlie  parable 
of  tlie  deer  and  the  horse,  hut  not  that  of  thf  r»[)  and  the  shoo. 
Provided  that  lion  Fei  7:、'''  presonttnl  liiinnelf  at  r<iurt  only  in  his 
shoes  and  without  n  rap,  I  would  listen  to  Imh  words.  Hut  lie 
will  uppear  at  court  with  liis  rap  <m  his  lie  usrs  a  »is<'less 

article  of  dress,  and  thereby  increases  tin*  number  of  the  uscIhss 
scholars.  I  lis  words  do  not  aj^rce  with  liis  dross,  ami  tliere  is  a 
want  of  harmony  between  his  theory  hihI  his  practice  Tlu'refore 
I  condemn  his  words,  and  reject  his  method. 

There  is  nothing  more  trying  to  tlie  body  of  an  individual 
and  less  profitable  to  it  than  kneeling  and  prostrating  one's  scl f. 
If  I  Ian  Fei  Tse,  when  meeting  any  one,  docs  not  make  obeisance, 
and  in  the  presence  of  liis  wm'reign  or  his  father  does  not  shmv 
his  res  pert,  lie  doe.s  not  do  any  harm  to  his  Ixxly,  but  these  cere- 
monies must  be  gone  through  out  t»f  rcspetrt   for  one's  parents. 

' On  the  Taoist  philosopher  I  Inn  Fei        see  p.  170. 

、 In  Chap"  1"，  No.  49,  p.  1  of  Han  Fei  work.   TIk-  chapter  is  entitled 

the:  "  Five  kinds  of  voracious  grubs." 

' An  annieiit  coin  or  a  monetary  unit  whose  value  is  doubtful. 
«  Cf.  Hun  Fei  Tse  XIII,  5v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


434 


Lui»  -  Heug :  E.  Crititjue. 


These  rules  ol*  propriety  are  very  important  and  cannot  be  neglected. 
While  they  are  being  observed  by  auy  one,  his  body  floes  not 
become  fat  tlier*'by.  and  when  he  disregards  them,  his  body  does 
not  become  w  eak  nor  decay. 

If  he  speaks  of  utility,  then  propriety  and  righteousness  are 
not  like  eating  and  drinking.  Would  Hon  Vei  Tse,  in  wise  he  was 
granted  the  previlr^e  of  eating  in  the  prestMice  of  his  sovereign 
or  his  lather,  dare  t"  do  so  without  first  bowing "."  8ucl»  a  homage 
shown  t<j  a  superior  would  be  a  uianilVstation  of  propriety  aiul 
righteousness,  but  no  IxMiclit  to  the  body.  Yt*t  alter  all  Han  hi  T、e 
would  not  do  away  with  it,  nor  would  he  reject  propriety  and 
righteousness  in  view  of  a  temporary  prolit.  The  Literati  arc 
propriety  and  righteousness,  the  agriculturists  and  warriors  are 
eatin-r  and  drinking.  He  who  exalts  agrirultvirc  and  war.  au<l 
despises  the  men  of  letters,  would  n\\erA  proprifty  and  righteous- 
ness, and  seek  eating  arid  drinking. 

When  propriety  and  riglit<'ousness  are  neglected,  the  moral 
laws  lose  tlioir  force,  their  is  conlusioH  iu  the  higher  and  tlie 
lower  spheres,  and  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  principles  become  dis- 
organised.  The  dry  and  the  wet  seasons  do  not  come  in  proper 
time  then,  the  grain  does  not  grow,  and  the  people  die  of  starva- 
tion. The  agriculturists  have  """ling  to  till,  and  tlic  soldiers  am 
do  no  fighting. 

l[Tse  Kung  desired  to  abolish  tli«  sacrificial  sheep  aunouueing 
the  new  moon.  ( 'ou/ucius  said,  "'/'.、■'',  you  (； are  for  the  sheep,  I  care 
for  propriety."]  Tse  Kung  disliked  to  immolate  the  sheep,  whereas 
Confucius  apprehended  a  disregard  ol*  propriety. 

If  old  dykea  are  removed  as  useless,  an  inundation  will  be 
the  necessary  consecjuenco,  and  if  the  old  ceremonies  are  abolished 
as  good  for  nothing,  one  may  be  sure  of  a  revolution.  The  Literati  in 
this  world  are  the  old  dykes  of  propriety  and  righteousness.  W lien 
they  are  there,  they  are  of  no  direct  use,  but  their  al>senctf  is  fatal. 

From  oldon  times  schools  have  been  erected,  where  the  founda- 
tion is  laid  for  power  and  honour.  Officials  have  been  appointed, 
and  officers  nominated.  The  oflicials  cannot  be  suppressed,  and 
the  true  doctrine  cannot  l>e  rejected.  The  Literati  are  the.  officers 
in  charge  of  the  true  principles.  If  they  arc  considered  to  be 
useless  and  therefore  suppressed,  the  true  principles  are  lost  simult- 
aneously. These  principles  bring  about  no  direct  results,  but  man 
requires  them  for  his  acliieveuicnte. 


1  AnaUct*  III,  17. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tse. 


4H5 


When  the  foot  walks  on  a  path,  this  trodden  path  must  not 
walk  itself.  The  body  has  hands  and  feet;  to  move  they  require 
what  remains  unmoved.  Thus  tilings  are  perhaps  useless,  but  the 
useful  ones  require  them,  they  tlierasolves  have  no  direct  effect, 
yet  to  those  whicli  have  tliey  are  indispensable.  Peasants  and 
soldiers  stand  in  need  of  the  Literati,  how  could  they  be  rejected 
and  not  bti  retained?  Uan  Fei  Tse  denounces  the  scholars,  saying 
that  tlu'y  are  no  use,  and  only  do  harm.  lie  has  in  view  the 
vulgar  scholars,  who  do  not  exert  themselves,  nor  in  their  dealings 
take  account  of  propriety.  They  are  scholars  by  nam«*  only.  l>ut 
by  practice  vulgar  persons.  They  profess  t rue  scienc«',  but  what 
they  say  is  、vroug，  and  they  are  hunting  after  official  liouours  and 
titles.  ('onse(|ui'ntly  they  cannot  be  held  in  esteem.  Tliose  who 
have  a  pure  heart  and  whose  conduct  does  not  shim  the  light, 
do  not  strive  for  rank  and  emoluments.  They  would  repudiate 
the  position  of  a  minister  or  a  secretary  of  State,  as  if  they  were 
tlirowing  away  an  old  boot.  Although  they  have  not  the  same 
success  as  those  who  hold  office  and  fill  a  post,  their  domain  is 
propriety  and  righteousness.  That  which  preserves  a  State,  is 
propriety  and  righteousness.  If  the  people  do  not  practice  these 
two  virtues,  they  will  overthrow  tlie  State  and  ruiu  their  prince. 

Now,  the  scholars  do  [iay  regard  to  propriety,  and  love  justicf. 
In  so  far  as  they  become  tlic  leaders  of  tliose  fellows  who  ure 
devoid  of  propriety,  and  incite  those  lacking  justice,  people  do 
good,  and  learn  to  love  their  sovt'n'igii.   That  ia  also  an  advautagc. 

Upon  hearing  of  the  fame  of  l*o  17 1  the  greedy  became  dis- 
interested, aad  the  weak,  resolute,  and  hearing  of  the  renown  of 
Liu  Hsia  Hut2  the  narrow-minded  became  generous,  and  the  mean, 
liberal.  The  conversion  was  more  extraordinary  than  had  ever 
been  witnessed  by  man  before.  Tium  Kan  Mu  closed  liis  door  aiul 
did  not  go  out.  Prince  Win  of  Wei  used  to  how,  when  passing 
his  house,  to  show  liis  respect.  When  the  army  of  (h  in  heard  of 
it,  they  suddenly  did  not  invest  Wei.9  Had  Wei  not  had  Tuan  Kan 
3/m,  the  soldiers  of  Ch  in  would  have  invaded  its  territory  and 
made  a  waste  of  it,  for  Ch  in  was  a  powerful  country,  wliose 
soldiers  were  ever  victorious.    Had  they  been  let  loose  upon  Wei, 

1  Cf.  p.  168  Note  2. 

s  The  posthumous  designation  of  Chan  Huo,  6th  and  7th  cent,  b.c,  who  w&s 
magistrate  of  the  Liu-hsia  district  in  Im  and  famous  for  his  virtue. 

3  Chin  desisted  from  its  invasion  of  Wn  hi  B.r.,  because  the  Wei  Slate 
was  so  flonrishing  under  the  Marqaia  Wrn,  who  honoured  the  worthies  and  literati. 
Vid.  Sht-cki  chap.  44,  p.  3v. 

28* 


Digitized  by  Google 


4B6 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


the  kingdom  of  Wet  would  have  gone  to  pieces.  Its  three  armies 
would  have  been  »lefeate<l,  and  the  blood  would  have  run  over  a 
thousand  Li.  Now  a  scholar  closeted  in  his  house  and  honoured 
hy  Win  of  Wei%  averted  the  troops  of  powerful  Ch  in  and  saved  the 
land  of  the  VI W  kingdom.  His  deserts  in  succouring  tlie  three 
armies  could  not  have  beon  greater,  and  nobody  was  worthier  of 
a  reward. 

In  Ch  i  there  were  living  two  scholars  of  the  highest  standard, 
called  K'tutng  Chtieh  and  lino  Shift,  two  brothers.  In  their  stern 
justice  they  did  not  bend  th«*ir  will,  and  refused  to  sorve  liim 
whom  they  (lid  not  regard  as  their  master.  When  Tai  Kuny  1  was 
invested  witli  ('h  i,  lie  had  the  two  men  executed  at  the  same  time 
for  inveigling  the  masses  in  C/ii,  setting  them  the  example  of  not 
taking  service  witli  their  ruler.  Han  Fei  Tse  approves  of  this  on 
the  ground  that  tho  two  scholars  were  of  no  use  and  doing  mis- 
chief.2 However,  K  wing  Chileh  and  Hua  ShUt  were  of  the  same 
type  as  Tnan  Kan  Mu.  When  T  ai  Kung  put.  tliem  to  death,  no 
disaster  Lad  y»'t.  happened  which  they  might  liave  averted.  The 
marquis  Wtn  of  Wei  hououred  Ttutn  Kan  Mu%  and  subsequently  he 
warded  off  |">、vt'rful  C/i  in  mid  rescued  Wei,  a  deed  unparalleled 
fors(K)th.  If  Han  Fri  Tse  acknowledges  the  liigli  .standard  of  '/，""《 
AVw*  Mu,  w  ho  shut  himself  up,  and  also  admits  t  hat  Wen  of  Wei  was 
justified  in  honouring  him,  he  is  all  right.  Hut  the  conduct  of 
Kuang  Chiie/i  and  I  Inn  Shih  was  ;ls  virtuous  as  that  of  Ttutn  Kan  Mu. 
Therefore  it  is  wrong  to  approve  of  the  penalty  inllii'ted  by  T  ni 
Kwig  Now,  if  Han  Fei  Tse  disapproves  of  tlu*  conduct,  of  Titan 
Kan  Mu,  and  objects  to  the  marquis  Wei  honouring  liim,  it  must 
be  horn  in  mind  that  'Juan  Knn  Mu  by  his  conduct  was  very  use- 
ful, and  that  the  marquis  of  Wei  lionoured  liim  on  account  of  liis 
merit.  Thux  linn  Fei  7:、v,  would  not  reward  merit,  nor  give  credit 
to  the  ust'l'iil. 

Some  one  mi«jjht  urge  that  tfic  rt'spect  shown  by  the  marquis 
to  the  dwelling  place  (»f  Tunn  Kan  Mu  and  the  subsequent  non- 
arrival  of  the  troops  of  C/i  in  is  not  the  result  of  administration, 
but  of  a  single  act ,  which  can  not  he  always  repeated  and  \\  bich, 
though  instrumental  in  saving  the  State,  does  not  deserve  so  much 
praise.  Hut  what  is  to  1"'  understood  by  ail  ministration?  The 
maintenain'e  ni'  troops,  \\w  |)romul^ation  of  tlie  edicts  con<*erning 


1   Cf.  p.  172.    T'ai  Kung  was  the  first  duke  of  ( 'h  i. 

， Han  Fri  Tuf  XIII,  f>  speaks  only  of  K'u'ing  Chi^h  being  put  to  death  by 
Tai  Kuny,  not  of  Hua  Shih. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  Han  Foi  Tse. 


AM 


rewards  and  |>uiiislini(>nts,  a  stern  criminal  law,  a  strict  discipline, 
and  measures  to  increase  the  national  、v<'altli  and  the  military 
strength,  all  that  is  administration.  Would  ( 'h  hi  with  lu»r  strength 
min<l  it?  The  Six  1  States  were  all  wiped  out  hy  the  troops  of 
Cli  in.  The  soldiers  of  the  Six  'States  were  courageous  enough, 
and  tlie  onslaught  of  thoir  armies  not  without  vigour,  y,'t.  not  only 
did  they  not  vanquish,  but  、vm'  utterly  defeated  at  last,  because 
they  were  not  of  equal  force  and  inlVrior  in  nuiubei-s.  Tlioir  a(l- 
ministratiou  uiiglit  have  been  ever  so  evident,  it  was  of  no  avail. 

Tf  boys  annoyed  Mhxg  Vhi  -  and.  when  lie  was  roused  to  anger, 
would  fight  with  him,  sword  in  hand,  they  would  certainly  court 
defeat,  being  no  match  for  him.  Had  the  boys  upon  Mthtg  Phi 
becoming  angry,  soothed  him  by  great  politeness  and  revereuco,  he 
would  not  have  been  capable  of  doing  harm  to  them.  Ch  in  s  position 
towards  Wei  is  analogous  to  that  of  Ming  IVn  and  the  boys.  The 
administration  of  HV»  would  certainly  nut  liave  Iriglitenod  Ch  in, 
just  as  Meug  I 'en  would  not  run  away  from  tlie  boys  when  wielding 
tlieir  swords.  Tl"，  honour  and  tlie  resj)ect  shown  to  scholars  and 
to  tlie  homes  of  wort  1  lies  would  be  more  than  the  jiolitciu'ss  and 
reverence  of  tlie  boys. 

Tlie  weak  will  have  m'ourst*  to  virtue,  wlim'as  those  wlio 
have  a  strong  army,  will  use  their  prwer.  Because  ('h' in  liad  such 
a  strong  army,  nothing  could  witlistatid  her  |x»\ver.  If  they  held 
back  their  troops,  and  rcoalled  tlieir  men,  aud  did  not  infest  Wei. 
it  was  out  of  respect  for  Tumi  Kan  Mu  and  as  a  mark  of  esteem 
for  the  marquis  of  MW.  Tlie  honouring  ol'  wortliics  is  an  ad- 
ministrative measure  of  weak  States  and  a  nieaiis  to  increase  tlie 
might  of  the  powerloss.  I  low  can  it  be  said  tliat  this  is  not  the 
result  of  aclministrntion? 

Han  Kao  Tm  had  tl">  intrntion  to  depose  tlir  heir-apparent. 
The  empress  Lil  Hon  in  her  ilistress  summoned  ( 'Imny  Tm  Fang 3  to 
ask  his  advice.  Chang  Tse  Fang  suggested  tluit  the  crown-j>rince 
should  reverently  meet  the  F<mr  Grey  Beanls.4  nud  present  fhem 
witli  rich  gifts.  When  Kao  Twt  saw  this,  lie  cliauged  his  mind, 
and  the  prince  was  saved.  Had  Hon  Fef  7:、'  advised  La  Hon,  that 
the  best  offensive  won'  -str'mg  remonstrances,  and  tlie  best  delVnsive, 
energy,  and  that   in  (his  m.-miuT  tl"'  prince  would  be  safe,  he 

>  Sec  p.  278  Note  1. 
' Cf.  j..  3S0  Note  4. 

3  The  same  as  Chnwj  Liamj,  tlie  helpmate  of  Han  Ka<>  Tm.    Cf.  p.  233. 
*   Four  rccl<isps,  who  dui  ing  the  t 糊 l"e、  attondinj;  the  overthrow  of  tlie  Ch'in 
d>i»asty  had  taken  icfugo  into  the  mountains  near  Hyi~ari-/u* 


Digitized  by  Google 


4：<8 


Lun  -Heng:  E.  Critique. 


would,  on  the  contrary,  have  brought  about  his  own  death,  not 
to  speak  of  his  deposition.  Tlie  deep  reverence  of  the  crown- 
prince  towards  tho  four  old  men  changed  I  la"  Kao  Tms  desiirn. 
Just  so  the  respect  shown  by  the  Marquis  Win  of  Wei  to  Tunn  Kan 
Mus  home  warded  off  tlie  troops  of  powerful  Ch'in. 


The  government  of  a  State  requires  the  cultivation  of  two 
things,  of  virtue  and  of  strength.  Virtue  is  cultivated  by  main- 
taining famous  men,  whereby  one  shows  one's  ability  to  liouour 
worthies.  Strength  is  developed  by  keeping  strong  men,  wliich 
shows  that  one  knows  how  to  use  soldiers.  Then  we  may  say 
that  all  the  civil  and  military  measures  are  in  operation,  and  that 
virtue  aud  strength  are  sufficient.  In  the  international  intercourse, 
a  State  may  win  the  other  side  by  virtue,  or  repel  it  by  force. 
If,  in  its  foreign  relations,  it  maken  virtue  its  basis,  and  at  the 
same  time  keeps  a  strong  force,  tliose  who  esteem  virtue,  will  be 
on  good  terras  with  it  without  fighting,  whereas  those  who  do 
not  care  for  virtue,  will  koop  aloof  for  fear  of  military  complications. 

King  Yen  of  Ilsfl 1  practised  benevolence  and  justice,  and  thirty- 
two  States  sent  envoys  to  his  court  overland.  When  powerful 
Ch  u  heard  of  this,  it  despatched  its  troops,  aud  destroyed  him. 
King  Yeii  of  Hffl  possessed  virtue,  but  had  no  strength  in  readiness. 
Om'  canirnt  solely  rely  on  virtue  to  govern  a  State,  nor  straight- 
way resort  to  force  to  ward  ofl'  an  enemy.  In  Han  Fei  T^es  system 
there  is  no  room  for  the  cultivation  of  virtue,  whereas  King  Yen 
of  HsU  did  not  rely  on  strength.  Bol)i  their  views  w(?rc  one-sided 
and  (roritradictory.  Kjng  Yen  tiame  to  grid,  because  lie  w  as  power- 
less, ami  we  may  be  suri，  that  Ihm  Fei  Tse  would  have  to  sufler 
for  want  of  virtue. 

Human  nature  is  j»ure  or  impure,  sellish  or  (lisinterestod,  aud 
people  act  accordingly.  In  the  same  inauner  plants  and  trocs  con- 
sist of  difTeront  substances,  which  cannot  change  again.  K' nnug 
( 'h—wli  and  Una  ShUi  did  not  take  oHii1*'  in  <7i  i,  as  luan  Kan  Mu  di<l 
not  become  an  official  in  Wei.  Tlicir  nature  was  pure  and  uu- 
sclfisli,  thoy  did  not  long  for  wealth  or  honour,  criticised  tlieir 
times,  and  dislik«'d  this  world.    Their  sew  of  justice  prevented 

1  From  Han  Fei  7V  chap.  10,  p.  2 v.  we  learn  that  Yen  was  the  sovercigu 
of  a  small  Suite  covering  square  li  in  Han- tuny  (Hupri).  King  W't'-n  Chu. 
68,S-075  b.c,  fearinp  tlie  growing  power  of  the  virtuous  Yen ― Han  Fei  Tst  speaks 
of  States  vvdli  !i  w，'r<'  nllicd  tr»  him-  dc-tnned  the  //."i  Suit,'.  〃',',,.  Sun  Txr  XIII, 
Hv.  also  r«!l'ei*s  to  )>n  ； mil  nientioiis  that  ：}2  States  were  bis  allies. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Stricture»  on  Han  Fei  Tse. 


thcin  from  taking  office  inconsiderately.  Even  if  they  had  not 
been  executed,  they  would  not  have  had  followers.  T  ai  Kuny  put 
them  to  death,  and  Han  Fei  Tse  thinks  him  quite  right.  But  that 
would  be  denying  that  men  have  their  special  natures,  and  plants 
and  trees  their  s[>ecial  substances. 

T  ai  Kung  beheaded  the  two  scholars.  Provided  that  there 
were  people  like  them  in  Ch  i,  they  would  certainly  not  have 
desisted  from  purifying  their  hearts,  because  the  two  were  put  to 
death,  and  if  there  were  none,  no  training  would  have  made  them 
such.  Yao  did  not  execute  Hsii  Fm,  1  yet  the  people,  of  T  ang 2  did 
not  all  live  in  uests.  Mu  Wang  did  not  kill  Po  Yi,  yet  the  people 
of  C/iau  did  not  starve  in  solitude,  aud.  when  Marquis  Wen  of  Wei 
bad  honoured  Tuan  Kan  Mus  dwelling-place,  the  people  of  Wei  did 
not  all  close  their  doors.  Consequently,  even  if  T  ai  Kung  had 
not  executed  the  two  men,  the  people  of  Cfii  would  not  all  have 
disdained  the  official  career,  for  people  cannot  assume  integrity 
antl  disinterestedness  at  will.  What  people  are  unable  to  do,  they 
cannot  be  iiuliioe<I  to  do,  and  all  training  and  exhorting  is  in  vain. 
Conversely  what  they  cau  do,  tliey  caunot  be  hindered  from  doing, 
even  executions  are  no  preventive.  Therefore  the  execution  of  the 
two  scholars  by  T  ai  Kung  was  not  calculated  to  bring  about  im- 
provement, it  was  a  useless  murder  of  innocent  persons. 

Han  Fei  Tse  would  not  approve  of  rewards  without  merit  or 
of  death  without  guilt.  T'ai  Kung  killed  innocent  men,  yet  Han 
Fei  Tse  assents  to  it,  ergo  his  theory  admits  the  assassination  of 
the  innocent.  Those  who  persist  in  not  taking  office,  have  not 
necessarily  some  real  guilt,  yet  T  ai  Kung  put  them  to  death.  If 
people,  who  had  become  officials,  had  no  merit,  would  Tai  Kung 
be  willing  to  reward  tliem?  Rewards  must  be  given  to  merit,  and 
punishment  meted  out  to  the  guilty.  If  Tai  Kung  did  not  reward 
oflicials  without  merit,  then  his  execution  of  innocent  men,  who 
•  lid  not  want  to  become  officials,  was  unjust.  Han  Fei  Tse'.s  approval 
is  a  mistake. 

Moreover,  people  who  do  not  become  officials  generally  have 
an  unseliish  character  and  i'ew  desire*,  wliereas  those  wlio  would 
like  to  take  "lf"、c,  are  greedy  of  profit.  As  long  as  desires  and 
the  thouglit  of  gain  are  not  ingrafted  in  one's  heart,  one  looks 
upon  rauk  and  salary  as  (lung  and  dirt.    'I  lie  disinterested  are 


1  A  legendary  hermit  of  the  time  of  the  emperor  Yao,  reported  to  have  lived 
in  a  nest  in  a  tree. 

2  Vao's  principality. 


Digitized  by  Google 


440 


Lun-Hcng:  K.  Critique. 


extremely  thrifty,  the  extravagance  of  the  ambitious  knows  no 
bounds,  and  therefore  their  desires  do  not  even  recoil  from  their 
sovereign.  Among  the  robellirig  officials  of  ancient  times  those 
with  pun'  and  unselfish  motives  l«ave  been  very  few.  The  am- 
bitious will  make  thomselves  conspicuous,  and  the  haughty  will 
risk  their  lives.  For  all  the  laurels  won  they  aspire  to  a  great 
reward,  aixl  in  their  immoderation  covet  princely  dignity. 

T  ai  Kung  left  his  system  behind,  ami  subsequently  Ch  i  was 
tlic  scene  of  the  violent  murder  perpetrated  by  the  (It  M  family.1 
T  ai  Kttng'.s  syMtem  led  to  robbery  and  murder.  Hon  Fei  Tse  praises 
it,  which  shows  tliat  his  own  theory  is  also  vrry  dangerous.  W  hen 
L'hott  Kung  lieard  of  t)ic  execution  of  the  two  men  by  7'  at  Kung. 
lie  e\presse<l  his  disapproval,  and  did  not  think  him  right  2  Per- 
sonally he  took  t'ta  and  coiulcsccndt'd  to  present  them  t<、  scholars 
living  in  poor  liuts.3  These  scholars  living  in  jx>or  huts  were  like 
the  two  men.  ( lum  Kmiy  honoured  tliem,  and  /'  ai  Kwuj  put.  them 
to  dpatli.    \V hose  action  was  the  right  one? 

【n  Sung  therfi  was  a  (； liarioteor.  A  liorsi'  rcfuse»l  to  go  on. 
lie  tlicrcupon  drew  liis  sword,  cut  its  throat,  and  thnnv  it  into  a 
ditch.  He  then  tried  another  horse,  wliicli  also  would  not  go. 
Again  he  exit  its  throat,  and  threw  it  into  a  ditch.  This  he  re- 
|,<'at，'(l  tlirico.  It  was  a  very  strong  measure  to  break  the  obstinacy 
of  liorses,  but  it  was  not  the  way  of  Wmuf 丄' •"",/.  When  lie  stepju'd 
into  a  carriage,  there  was  no  hors<"  stubborn  or  restive.  During 
tin-  reign  of  Yno  and  Shun,  tl"'  people  wen*  not  rebellious.  Wantj 
Unrig  ki"'、v  liow  to  touch  the  hearts  of  the  liorsos,  just  as  Yao 
and  kS/h/h  inllueiuvd  flio  popular  feelings. 

Men  have  the  same  nature,  hut  there  ar<'  (lifTerent  kinds  of 
hor.st-s.  Waiii/  Liang  could  manage  those  difrerent  kinds,  whereas 
T'fii  Kung  cnu\d  not  fiot  along  with  -scholars,  who  were  all  of  the 
same  nature.     「/,'"/  kindness   towards   the  poor  scholars 

corre.spoiidH  to  \S'<mg  Lumg's  ln)rs<*-l)rcakiiig.  T  ai  Kungs  execution 
of  the  two  sclii>lai-s  is  like  tl"'  tlir<>at-4:uttiii^  '"•  the  man  of  Sung. 

H'  II""  F'i  7:"'  wen"  called  upon  to  decide  I  n't  ween  tho  methods 
of  Wang  L'mmj  and  the  man  o{'  Snuff,  lie  would  certainly  be  iu 
i':iv"ur  of  W'nnrj  LkiDff  and  against  tlie  man  of  Sung.  Wang  Liang 
preserved  tl"'  horses,  tho  man  of  Sung  destroyed  them.    The  (le- 

1  In  IS1  b.c.  t  'h'i'n  Ih'nrf  alias  T  irn  ( 'h'rttt/  Tue  murdered  the  sovereign  of 
f.  '/*  •',  a  desi-endant  of  T  ni  Kuny.  The  r/,','"  family  had  assumed  tlic  name  T'irn 
iu  <  h'i.    Cf.  Shi-ch!  chap.  82,  p.  24 v.  and  chap.  ：]('»,  p.  7. 

2  v,j  ii  h  iv,  r.sr  xiii, :、. 

3  Cf.  p.  4S<». 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  I  Ian  Fei  T.se. 


441 


st ruction  of  horses  is  not  as  goml  as  tlieir  prosiTvation.  Thus  it  is 
hettt'T  that  people  dmuld  live  than  that  tlu'y  should  die.  Should 
ffnn  Fri  Tse  U'  against  Wung  Luuig.  1"'  would  be  on  a  level  with 
the  man  of  Snug  hy  destroying  good  ju-ople.  If  he  against  the 
man  of  Sung,  it  must  be  borne  in  niiiid  tliat  the  latter's  method  is 
the  same  as  tliat  of  7'  ai  Kuny.  By  cou 山 "lining  the  man  of  Sung 
and  upholding  T  ni  Ktt'tg,  Han  Fri  Tsc  would  sliow  that  hr  onnuot 
distrirainate  between  riglit  and  wroiiff. 

Tlie  government  of  a  State  is  like  governing  an  individual. 
If  in  governing  an  individual  gract'  and  virtue  are  st'Uloni  resortr<l 
to,  but  much  bodily  injury  is  indicted,  friends  ami  partisans  will 
make  tliemselves  scarce,  lest  disgrace  should  befall  them.  If  the 
principles  of  governing  an  individual  are  extended  to  the  govern- 
ment of  a  State,  this  government  must  be  based  on  virtue.  I  Ian 
Fd  Tse  solely  relies  on  criminal  law  to  *rovern  the  world.  That 
would  mean  tliat  he  who  governs  an  individual,  must  trust  to  the 
infliction  of  injurifs.  Does  /Ian  Fei  l\e  not  know  that  to  place 
reliance  on  virtue  is  the  host  way? 

He  holds  that  tli«  \vr»rlcl  is  depraved,  that  things  have  changed 
lor  the  worse,  and  that  the  general  feelings  are  base  and  mean. 
Therefore  in  working  out  a  systfin  his  only  thouglit  is  penal  law. 
However,  the  world  is  not  delinient  in  virtue,  as  a  year  is  not 
deprived  of  its  spring.  Would  lie  \vli<»  contends  tliat  owing  to  its 
depravity  tlio  world  cannot  be  governed  l)y  virtur.  assert  also  that 
a  year  full  of  trouhI«\s  <l<n-8  not  ^eucratt*  in  spring? 

A  wise  ruler  governs  a  country  as  IIe<iven  and  Eartli  create 
all  things.  In  ;i  year  of  troubles  they  do  no\  omit  spring,  and  a 
wise  ruler  (lot's  not  discaril  virtue,  because  the  world  is  degenerated. 
Cfmfuchts  said,1  "  Those  people  were  the  cause  of  tlie  steady  pro- 
gress of  the  three  dynasties!  "  2 


Tlie  time  of  Kino  Mn  ol'  ( 7imi 3  onn  be  railed  one  of  ilooay. 
He  attomiitod  fo  g<m、r"  witli  criminal  la、v,  hut  the  result  was 
confusion,  and  no  fjlory  \v;is  won.  The  Martjuis  of  Fn  remonstrated 
with  him,  iiud  tl"'  king  became  attadied  to  virtue,  and  enjoyed 

1  AnnlecUt  XV，  24. 

,J  Tlie  depravity  of  \\w  \wo\\\v  Ciintiot  have  been  as  great  as  Han  Fei  Tst 
presumed,  lor  otltorwisc  ihr  proyn-ss  made  during  tlie  tlncc*  d yunsties :  -  Ihkt,  Shuny, 
and  <  'ho"  could  not  liavo  Ihhui  ao<,(nii])li>li<-tl. 

a   I001-'.t4ti  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


442 


I-mi-H^iig:  I':.  Oiti«jue. 


his  kingdom  for  a  long  time.  His  deeds  were  lianded  down  to 
posterity.  King  Mns  administration  first  led  to  disorder,  but  at 
last  to  order,  not  because  his  mind  was  beclouded  first,  and  his 
talents  came  forth  later  on,  but  because  lie  at  first  relied  on  CI,  ih 
Yus 1  criminal  law,  and  only  subsequently  followed  the  advice  of 
the  Marquis  of  Fn.  In  governing  individuals,  one  cannot  do  without 
mercy,  in  governing  a  State  one  cannot  neglect  virtue,  and  in 
creating  things  spring  cannot  be  left  out.  Why  does  I  Ian  Fei  Tse 
wish  to  rely  on  law  and  capital  punishment  alone? 


2 [Duke  Mit  of  Lu 3  asked  Tse  Sse*  saying,  "I  have  heard  that 
I*  ang  Hsien  is  no  Glial  son.    How  is  his  uufilial  conduct  .1 " 

Tse  Sse  replied,  A  prince  honours  the  virtuous  to  exalt  virtue, 
and  raises  the  good  to  admonish  the  people.  As  regards  faults, 
only  coimncm  people  know  about  that,  not  I." 

Wlien  Tse  Sse  had  left.  Tse  Fn  Li  Po  saw  the  prince,  who 
(juestioned  him  about  lyong  Hsien  s  filial  conduct  also.  Tse  Fu  Li  Po 
rejoined,  "Your  Highness  has  not  yet  heard  about  all  his  misdeeds." 

Afterwards  the  prince  held  Tse  Sse  in  esteem  and  despised 
Tse  Fu  Li  Po.]  When  Hun  Fei  Tse  heard  of  it,  he  censured  duke  Mu 
on  the  ground  that  a  wise  ruler  ought  to  search  for  scoundrels 
and  punish  thera.  Tse  Sse  would  not  speak  about  rascality,  which 
Tse  Fu  Li  Po  did.  riiereforo.  in  Han  Fei  Tm，s  belief,  the  latter 
deserved  honour,  and  tl"'  former  contempt.  Since  Duke  Mu  esteemed 
Tse  Rse  anil  despised  Tse  Fu  Li  I，o,  he  did  not  divide  honour  and 
contempt  in  the  right  way,  l»ence  Han  Fei  Tses  adverse  criticism. 

Il/m  Fei  Tse  lays  the  greatest  stress  upou  administration.  If 
a  man  does  good,  tlie  administration  rewards  him,  if  he  does  evil, 
it  punishes  him.  Even  if  gootl  and  evil  do  not  transpire,  they 
full  under  strict  rules.  Yet  merely  hearing  of  a  bad  deed,  one 
caimot  punish  at  once,  as  hearing  of  a  good  one,  one  cannot  rashly 
reward  it.  It  is  tlierefore  not  in  keeping  with  the  theory  of  I  Ian 
Fei  Tse  to  blame  a  man  l'or  uot  having  denounced  wickedness. 


1  A  legendary  person  said  to  have  lived  at  tlie  time  of  the  Emperor  HxMng  Ti. 
He  rebelled  against  tlie  latter,  and  was  defeated.  Some  say  that  he  、vas  a  prince, 
who  terrorised  the  people,  others  that  \\v  was  a  minister  of  Huany  Ti. 

- Quoted  with  some  slight  alterations  from  Huai  Nan  Tst  chap.  16,  p.  1. 

3  +18  ：575  b.c. 

4  His  full  name  is  h'  un  /  Tnr  S^e  or  K'ung  Chi,  (he  grandson  of  Confachu, 
to  wliom  the  〃Ati"y-y'",,/，  tin-   •  I>octriiif  of  ilu;  Mean  '  is  ascribed. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tsc. 


44： 


Suppose  Han  Fei  Tse  heard  of  a  good  action,  lie  would  certainly 
make  investigations  lirst  and,  in  case  some  merit  were  brought  to 
light  thus,  lie  would  grant  a  reward.  Upon  tlie  mere  news  of  some 
good  deed,  one  dot's  not  reward  indi«cTiininatcly,  for  not  every 
remark  is  reliable.  Therefore  it  makes  no  difference,  whether  we 
hear  of  good  actions  or  not.  Hearing  of  goodness,  one  does  not 
rashly  reward,  and  upon  hearing  of  wickedness,  one  does  not 
punish  forthwith.  Hearing  of  goodness,  one  must  first  investigate, 
and  hearing  of  badness,  one  must  make  inquiries.  Provided  some 
merit  is  discovered,  then  a  reward  may  be  given,  and,  if  there  is 
evidence,  a  penalty  may  be  determined.  Rewards  and  punishments 
are  not  given  upon  mere  hearsay  or  vague  appearances,  before 
the  truth  is  found  out.  and  as  long  as  they  are  not  given,  good- 
ness and  badness  are  not  determined.  Therefore  there  must  be  a 
method  to  establish  them,  and  it  is  not  right  to  require  that  one 
must  have  heard  the  thing  with  one's  own  ears. 

l[Tse  Ch  nn  of  Citing2  went  out  one  morning,  and  passed  the 
house  of  Tung  Chiang,  where  he  heard  t)je  cries  of  his  wife.  He 
grasped  the  hand  of  his  attendant,  and  listened.  After  a  while, 
he  directed  his  officers  to  arrest  the  woman,  and  sue  her  for  having 
murdered  her  husband  with  her  own  liand. 

The  next  day  his  attendant  asked  hini,  "  Sir,  how  did  you 
know  all  this? ，， 

Tse  Ch  an  replied,  "  Fler  voice  was  not  iiiov<;d.  When  people 
learn  tliat  those  tliev  love  dearly  are  sick,  tlioy  bocoin^  depressed, 
when  deatlt  approaches,  they  get  alarmed,  and,  aftfr  death,  give 
vent  to  their  grief.  This  、vomau  bewailed  her  tk*ad  husband,  but 
in  lieu  of  being  grieved  she  was  frightened.  Thence  I  knew  that 
she  had  committed  a  crime."] 

Han  Fei  Tse  expressed  his  disapproval  and  said  3[,  "  Was  not 
Tse  Chan  a  busy  body?" 

If  a  crime  could  only  be  knowu,  when  、、'<'  perceive  it  with 
our  own  eyes  or  ears,  very  few  eases  would  be  disclosed  in  Cl^m/. 
And  would  it  not  he  a  lack  of  metliod,  if  the  city  police,  could 
not  be  trustt-d  to  possess  the  necessary  insight  for  examining  the 
conduct  of  the  smaller  congregations  of  tlie  mninmnity,  and  if  oir' 
had  to  use  all  owns  intelligence  and  mental  power  to  disco vor 
such  cases';'"] 

1  Han  Fei  T»e  chap.  1G,  p.  f».    Tlie  text  sliglitl  v  difTors. 

2  T.se  (  fi  an  is  tlie  style  of  Kttng  Sun  ('ki'io,  a  fomotis  minister  of  the  <  'hvr>y 
Stato,  5S1-.V21  u.f.,  who  coiupik-d  a  ponal  toilc. 

A  h>c.  cit,  p.  r)、、 


Digitized  by  Google 


444 


Luii-Heng:  E.  Crilii|ue. 


Han  Fei  Tse  is  justified  in  blaming  Tse  (，l"m、  but  he  is  wrong 
in  his  adverse  comments  on  Duko  Mu.  The  lack  of  grief  of  the 
woman  is  like  tlie  un filial  conduct  of  P  ang  ll.sien.  Ihm  tVi  Tae 
objects  to  Tse  Ch  an  reiving  merely  on  his  eyes  and  ears  to  get 
information  about  crimes,  V>ut,  on  the  other  hand,  wishes  that 
Duko  Mu  should  have  made  iruiuiries  to  ileterrainc  the  guilt  of 
P  any  Ihien.  Tsi-  Ch  an  had  no  recourse  to  the  city  police,  ami 
determined  the  truth  from  what  he  heard.  Duke  Mu  (lid  not 
place  confidence  in  tlie  police  cither,  and  attained  the  same  result 
by  his  inquiries.  Hearsay  and  inquiries  are  about  the  same  thing. 
Neither  trusted  the  police,  or  made  investigations  among  the  citizens. 
From  Tse  Fu  Li  Pa's  answer  it  is  impossible  to  learn  the  truth,  just 
as  from  the  crying  of  the  woman  one  cannot  arrive  at  a  cogent 
conclusion.  If  under  such  fircumstanocs  one  orders  the  officers  to 
arrest  and  try  a  person,  one  cannot  find  out  the  truth  thereby. 
But  l")、v  is  it  possible  not  to  order  tlie  officers  to  make  investi- 
gations and  to  clia !'}；«'  a  person  with  a  crime  without  any  inquiries 
merely  upon  the  word  of  Tse  Fu  Li  Po? 

Han  hei  Tse  says  '| ,  Tse  Sse  did  not  mention  faults,  and  Duke 
Mu  honoured  him.  Tse  Fu  Li  I'o  spoke  of  crimes,  and  Duke  .、/" 
<lespised  him.  Human  nature  is  such,  that  all  people  like  honour 
and  are  displeased  witli  contempt. 

When  the  Chi  family  -  made  trouble,  it  was  not  brought  to 
the  kuowled^o  of  the  sovereign,  and  i'onsequently  the  princes  of 
Lu  \vei-e  robbetl  of  tlit'ir  power.]  Were  they  robbed,  because  tliey 
did  not  mak(，  a  wise  use  of  tl"，  laws  and  administration  or,  because 
they  did  not  hear  of  the  wicked  designs  in  time?  If  the  ad- 
ministration is  wisely  organised,  wickedness  has  no  fichl  where  it 
miglit  grow,  altliough  it  bo  not  heart!  of,  whereas  in  case  the  ad- 
ministration is  riot  wise,  the  searching  after  criminals  is  like  digging 
a  well,  and  then  trying  to  stop  it  with  one  hand. 

If  a  cbariot-driver  without  a  bridle  sees  a  horse,  it  will  run 
away,  and  he  has  no  coercive  lm'ans.  Should,  however.  Waug 
Liang 3  have  conic  near  with  reins  in  his  hand,  no  horse  would 
have  had  the  desire  to  bolt.  He  knew  the  method  of  driving 
liorses.  Now,  nothing  is  said  about  tlie  princes  of  Lu  having  no 
method,  but  it  is  mentioned  that  tliey  did  not  hear  of  the  treason- 

1  Han  Fei  Tse  chap.  16,  p.  1. 

2  During  the  (>tli  cent.  b.c.  the  (  hi  family,  :t  .side  branch  of  the  ducal  house 
of  Lu、  engrossed  tlio  power  in  Lu  and  almost  superseded  the  reigning  princes. 
( onfaciitJi  openly  condciimeJ  their  usurpation,    (  f.  p.  30;». 

3  See  above  p.  440. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Strictures  on  Han  Fei  Tsc. 


14o 


able  designs,  nothing  is  said  about  their  looking  after  the  govern- 
ment, but  it  is  emphasized  that  tliey  did  not  understand  the  feelings 
of  the  people.  Han  Fei  Tse's  attack  on  Duke  \Iu  does  not  tally 
with  the  tendency  of  his  theory. 

Tse  Sse  did  not  speak  of  P  ang  Hsien's  unfilial  conduct,  there- 
fore Duke  Mu  honoured  him.  Han  Fei  Tse  blames  him,  saying  that 
" a  wise  ruler  looks  out  for  the  good  to  reward  and  for  rascals  to 
punish  them,"  1 ― Untilial  persons  have  a  very  limited  intellect.  For 
want  of  insight,  tliey  know  no  propriety,  and  follow  their  desires 
and  propensities  just  like  beasts  and  birds.  One  may  call  them 
bad,  but  to  call  them  rascals  is  not  correct.  Rascals  are  good  in 
outward  appearance,  but  bad  inwartlly,  or  "  they  sliow  a  stern 
exterior,  and  are  inwardly  weak,"  2  and  in  their  doings  imitate  the 
good  to  get  on  in  their  career.  They  smile  to  their  superiors— 
how  could  they  be  unfilial  .'—but  tliey  do  wicked  things,  whicli 
make  tliem  worthy  of  capital  punishment.  P  ang  Ilsutn  can  bt> 
said  to  have  been  untilial,  but  not  a  rascal.  11'  Han  Fei  Tse  culls 
him  so,  he  ignores  the  true  meaning  of  this  word. 

Han  Fei  Tse  says:3 ― f-  If  silk  fabrics  are  so  common,  that 
ordinary  people  do  not 山' sire  them,  and  if  gold  can  be  cast  into 
a  hundred  coins  without  robber  Chi  snatching  it  away,  then  we 
can  speak  of  a  manifestation  of  law."]  People  do  not  dare  to  in- 
fringe it.  If  the  law  is  manifest  in  a  State,  robbers  are  afraid  to 
break  it,  and  do  not  venturo  to  bring  about  unforeseen  calamities. 
They  hide  tlieir  vicious  thoughts  in  their  liearts,  and  dare  not 
transgress  tlie  ponal  law.  being  in  awe  of  it.  If  the  law  is  known 
and  dreaded,  there  is  no  need  lor  investigating  rascality,  or  in- 
quiring after  wiokedin'ss  among  tl">  citizens.  If  the  law  is  im- 
posing, people  are  not  vicious,  if  it  is  not,  they  commit  luanv  a 
felony.  Now  Han  Fei  7:"'  dors  not  sprak  of  the  severe  penalties 
and  the  awe-inspiring  law  of  a  wise  sovcrHgn,  but  tlint  he  is  on 
the  look-out  for  misiTcants  to  punisli  them.  If  he  says  that  he 
looks  out  lor  inisiTeants.  the  law  is  imt  awe-inspiring,  so  that 
people  oflt'iul  against  it.  In  the  world  im" 山  more  attention  is 
paid  to  the  persecution  of  criminals  than  to  upholding  the  res  poet 
of  the  law.  Then- to  re  I  Inn  Fei  7:"'、'  remarks  do  not  a^ree  with 
the  law. 

When  the  water  of  a  i'm'k  is  let  out,  those  who  know  that 
it  can  drown  a  rnau,  do  not  uttouipt  to  stop  the  current,  but  tliey 

1   I lan  Fei  Tse  he.  cit. 

3   Analects  XVII,  12. 

3  Ihm  Fei  Tat  cliap.  19,  p.  4. 


Digitized  by  Google 


41(5 


Lun  -Heng:  E.  Critique. 


keep  boats  and  oars  in  readiness.  They  know  the  nature  of  the 
water,  that  its  rush  cannot  be  checked,  and  that  it  would  certainly 
drown  a  man.  When  a  subject  or  a  son  is  bent  upon  committing 
a  misdeed  against  his  sovereign  or  his  father,  they  are  like  the 
water  whidi  drowns  a  man.  Now,  Han  Fei  Tse  does  not  inform 
us,  wliich  precautions  might  be  taken  against  tli,'  crime,  but  takes 
exception  that  it  is  not  know  n  or  heard  of.  This  would  be  nothing 
else  (lian  not  to  proparr  tho  noccssnry  iinploments  for  the  water, 
and  merely  to  wisli  to  learn,  as  soon  as  possible,  tliat  the  \v;iter  is 
drowning  somebody.  Being  drowned  l>y  water  one  cannot  hold 
the  water  accountable,  but  is  (>i"'st'lf  guilty  of  having  negle»-tetl 
the  necessary  precautions. 

When  a  sovereign  is  robbed  by  a  subject,  he  himself  has 
neglootrd  the  law.  Preparing;  against  drowning,  one  docs  not  《lam 
ill  the  i'Muntniii-liead,  and  in  guarding  oneself  ;i<>;aiiis(  an  attack, 
one  does  not  look  out  for  tlio  misdemeanours  of  tho  subjoots. 
If""  Fei  T.se  stands  in  need       self-instruction  on  tliese  points. 

Tlu'  naluro  water  is  strongt-r  than  fire,  but  pour  the  u  atcr 
into  a  kettle,  it  will  but  not  gain  the  upper  hand.   A  sovereign 

is  like  lire,  a  subject  like  、v:，h'r，  adiniuistration  is  the  kettle.  Fire 
dors  not  seek  the  misdeeds  of  \\  ator.  Tims  a  prince  ought  not 
to  searcli  lor  (lie  faults  of  his  sul)j«Tts. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statements  Collected. 


447 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 
Statements  Corrected  (CMny-shuo). 

The  researches  of  the  Literati  into  tlic  Five  (\*inons  1  for  the 
most  part  miss  the  truth.  Tl"、  former  scholars,  unable  to  distinguisli 
between  esseutial  and  acridental  points,  indulged  in  fanciful  in- 
ventions, and  their  successors,  relying  on  tl"，  words  of  old  teaoliers, 
stuck  to  tho  old  traditions  and  walked  in  the  old  grooves.  Softn 
well  versed  in  quibbling,  tlicy  would  tlimightlpssly  upljold  tlie  doc- 
trine of  one  master  and  follow  tlie  t«u^iin<^s  of  tliHr  professor. 
When  the  time  had  come,  they  quickly  took  office,  and  in  their 
eagerness  for  promotion,  tliey  had  no  time  loft  to  «levote  their 
faculties  to  the  l"""Uing'  ot*  such  prolilcms.  Consr((U<*ntly  an  un- 
broken chain  of  false  t】"w"'s  lias  been  handed  down,  and  truth 
has  lii<l  her  face. 

The  truth  about  tlie  Five  Canons  has  been  equally  obscured, 
but  compaml  with  the  Yikinf/,  the  statements  about  the  Shuking 
and  the  "  Spring  nud  Autumn "  are  still  tolerably  correct. 

Tli is  rough  tliemc  may  serve  as  an  introduction  into  the  minor 
details  of  this  essay. 


Some  of  tlw  critics  of  the  Sltnking  are  of  opinion  that  originally 
it  consisted  of  one  hundred  and  two  chapters,  and  that  afterwards, 
when  Ch  in  burnotl  the  l)»oks  of  poetry  and  history,  twenty-niuc 
chapters  were  preserved.  Tlie  statement  that  ('Hin  burn,'(l  tlie  books 
of  poetry  ami  liistory  is  correct,  but  the  assertion  (hat  originally 
there  were  one  hundred  and  two  chapters  is  ern»t»(*ous. 

Tlie  S/ivkiuff  fonsistt'il  of  one  liundreil  chapters  first,  which 
were  transmitted  by  Coufncins.  When,  by  tlie  advin*  of  JJ  Sse、 
Ch  in  burned  the  Five  Canons,  Fit  S/iaif/ 2  of  C Id-nan a  took  the 
hundred  chapters  and  con (； ealed  them  in  a  mountain.1   Under  the 

1  The  Five  King  or  ancient  Classics :  Yikhg,  Shiking,  Shukintf,  Liki,  and 
('h'un-ch'iu. 

*  A  scholar  of  great  learning. 

3  The  capital  of  Shantung. 

4  The  Shi-chi  chap.  121，  p.  h  «ays  "  in  a  wall.*' 


Digitized  by  Google 


418 


Lun-II^ng:  E,  Criticjue. 


reign  of  the  Emperor  Hsi/io  Ching  Ti 1  the  Shoeing  was  saved.  Fu 
Shhig  liad  taken  it  out  from  the  mountain.  Ching  Ti  sent  Ch'ao  JVo 
to  him.  He  received  from  Fu  Sh4ng  twenty  odd  chapters  of  the 
Shuking.  Fu  Siting  died  as  a  very  old  man.  His  book  was  greatly 
damaged.    Ch  an  Ts'o  handed  it  over  to  Ni  K  iuzn. 

During  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Hsiao  Ihilan  7i8  a  young 
woman  in  Ih-nei,3  while  opening  an  old  room,  discovered  a  chapter 
of  a  prt'served  Yiking,  LiJci,  and  ShukiDg.  The  books  were  presented 
to  the  emperor,  wlio  communicated  them  to  the  principal  men  of 
learning.  Subsequently  the  Yikiug,  the  IJki,  ajid  the  Sltukiug  had 
each  one  (rhapter  ad(]«'d.  It  was  then  that  tlie  number  of  the 
chapters  of  the  Shaking  was  brought  up  to  twenty-nine. 

When  Hsiao  Ching  Ti  had  ascendrd  the  throne,4  Prince  Kuny 
of  Lu,h  while  deniolishing  the  scliool  of  Confiu-ius  for  tin1  purpose 
of  building  a  palace  there,  found  a  copy  of  tho.  Sfut/dup  in  one 
hundred  (！ ha[)tt*rs  in  tlie  wall.*  TIio  Knijieror  Wu  It  sent  m,isst'ng*'rs 
to  fetcli  the  b(»oks  i'or  liitn  to  see,  but  there  was  nobody  who 
could  n'ad  them,  wliereupon  he  stored  them  away  in  the  palace, 
so  that  m，  one  outside  could  see  them. 

Under  the  Kmp«*ror  Union  L'!"i"j  Ti "'  the  study  of  the  Shukiny 
in  ancient  characters  rewivod  a  new  impetus.  Chang  \*a  of  Tung-haiB 
concocted  a  Sltuk;"'j  of  one  lii""lml  and  two  cliaptrrs,  following 
tlic  ordrr  of  tlio  lnuulred  clia|"《'rs，  aiul  jncbOnted  it  to  the  emperor. 
The  "iii|"'ror  produced  the  c(mc<*al'、（l  hnndre<l  chapters  for  com- 
parison, but  it  was  found  out  that  tlioy  did  not  agree  at  all.  Upon 
tins  (lie  <'ni|"'ror  linuded  ( 'hang  l*a  over  to  tht*  court.  The  .judges 
，lt'rlaml  that  his  crinic  (lcserv<Ml  death,  hut  tl"'  emperor,  who  liail 
a  very  hi^li  oj>inion  of  his  talents,  did  not  put  him  to  death,  nor 
did  1"'  destroy  his  writin«js,  for  which  hp  had  a  certain  weaknt'ss. 
Thus  tl"'  one  linndivd  and  two  chapters  wore  liandfd  down  to 
postiTi'ty,  and  pooph-  who  saw  tlicin  imagined  tliat  the  S/otkin(/  had 
one  liundrcd  and  two  chapters  first. 

i   l;>r,  141  li.r. 

3    A  city  in  lluai-vhiittj-fo  (Ilonan). 
' In  l.r><»  n.v. 

b  A  -son  of  the  Kiiip,", ("-  Vhimj  Ti,  who  in  K»4  n.c.  w:is  made  I，rmce  of  L". 

r'  Iu  addition  to  tlit-se  liundred  cliaplcrs  of  tlu-  Shukiny,  a  Li(k>)  hi  3<HJ  cliupters, 
a  <  lian-iWin  in  :"H»  c-liapt»*rs  and  a  Lun-yu  in  2\  chapters  were  brought  to  light, 
Cf.  L'm_h':ny  XX,  -1  v.  (  Yi-urn). 

7  32  7  b.c. 

， A  |>lace  in  Iluni  iin-fu  (Kiangm). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statements  Corrected. 


449 


Some  hold  that,  when  Cli  in  S/tih  Huang  Ti  burned  the  "poetry 
(and  the)  books,"  1  he  burned  the  Book  of  Poetry,  but  not  the  Canons. 
Tlius  tlie  SJiikiiiff  would  alouc  have  been  committed  to  the  flames. 
However,  the  term  "  poetry  and  the  books  ，，  is  a  general  designation 
of  the  Five  Canons.  . 

There  is  a  common  saying  to  tlie  effect  tliat  a  lad  who  does 
not  read  the  Canons  is  bent  on  plays  and  amusemtMits.  "  Tse  Lu 
got  T.se  Kfttt 2  appointed  governor  of  M.3  The  Master  said,  1  You 
are  in  juring  a  mail's  son.' ― 7*r  L"  replied,  "  There  art'  the  jK'ople. 
and  there  are  the  spirits  of  tin*  hind  and  grain.  Wliy  niusr  one 
road  books,  bofore  he  can  be  considered  to  liavc  learned  ?" 4 

A  general  term  for  tlie  Five  ('anony  is  "  the  books. '*  Those 
who  have  reconled  tlie  burning  of  the  books  by  Ch  in  do  not  know 
tlie  reason  lor  this  measure,  therefore  they  <lo  not  understand  its 
meaning.5 

In  tl"、  24th  year  of  Ch  in  Shih  Himmj  It's  reign,6  a  banquet 
was  given  in  the  〃.";'"-.'„  |)alace.  Seventy  great  scholars  wished 
the  emperor  long  life,  and  the  f'u-i/eh 7  ( 'hou  Cli  ituj  Ch  en  made  a 
eulogistic  speech.  When  the  emperor  liad  gathered  all  the  people 
around  him,  ,S7'"〃  Fa  Yileh  remonstrated  with  Iiim.  He  was  of 
opinion  that,  because  tlie  emperor  did  not  grant  fifl's  to  the  sons 
of  the  nobility,  a  catastrophe  like  tliat  of  T  ien  ( hang 8  and  the 
six  ministers9  wa*}  unavoidable.  Besides  In;  stigmatised  Clum  C/ting 
(—'/""' s  panegyric  as  a  flattery  of  the  emperor. 

Ch  in  S/ti/t  Hnnnij  Ti  haiuled  ov<*r  liis  memorial  to  thr  premier. 
The  premier,  Li  S^e、  re^ardrd  the  lvmarks  of  Shun  Yii  Yi'ieh  as  qui  to 
unfit  to  he  taken  into  consideration.  For  this  reason  lu*  detiounccd 
tlie  speeches  of  tfic  literati  as  inveigling  tho  black  haired  people. 
Tlien  the  oftirials  were  ordered  to  completely  di'stroy  tlie  Five 


， Tee  Lu  and  'I'w  Kao  were  both  disciples  of  Confuriw*. 
， A  place  in  Shantung. 
*  AnaUct*  XI,  24. 

5  On  the  burning  of  tlie  books  cf.  p.  490. 

6  This  is  a  nmprinu  It  was  the  34th  year  (213  B.r.).  See  tlie  Shi-chi  irliap.  6, 
p.  21  v.  and  p.  4'.)0. 

7  An  official  title  under  the  ( '/tin  and  Han  dynasties. 

， A  noble  of  the  State  of  ( A  i,  who  in  IS1  h.c.  put  to  death  the  reigning 
sovereign  Duke  (  hien,  and  usur|>ed  the  goveniincut  of  the  State  with  the  title  of 
chief  minister. 

9  The  chiefs  of  the  six  powerful  families  in  Chin  who  strugpled  for  supremacy. 
Three  of  these  families  were  destroyed  during  these  struggles,  the  remaining  three: 
Chao,  Han  and  Wd  in  403  b.c.  divided  the  (  hm  State  among  them. 

Luii  -  Htug.  29 


Digitized  by  Google 


450 


Liui-Heng:  E.  Critique- 


Canons  by  fire.  Those  who  dared  to  conceal  books  or  writings  of 
the  hundred  authors 1  should  be  severely  dealt  witli.  Only  members 
of  the  academy  were  allowed  to  keep  books.  Thus  the  Five  Canons 
were  all  burned,  and  not  merely  the  books  of  the  various  schools 
of  thought.  In  this  the  writers  on  this  epoch  believe.  Seeing  that 
poetry  and  "  books "  are  mentioned  we  can  only  say  that  the 
Canons  are  here  termed  "books." 


Some  writers  on  the  Shitking  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  it 
was  burned  by  Chin,  but  urge  that  twenty-nine  chapters  were 
saved  and  U*ft  unscathed..  If  this  was  the  case,  tlien  were  tlie 
twenty-nine  chapters  of  the  Shuking  left  by  tlie  fire,  and  did  the 
seventy-one  chapters  become  coal  and  ashes,  whereas  the  twenty- 
nine  remained? 

When  Fu  Sh^ng  was  old,  C/i  ao  T  so  studied  under  him  and 
just,  when  he  had  received  twenty  odd  chapters,  Fn  Sheng  died. 
Therefore  these  twenty-uinc  chapters  alone  came  forth,  and  tlie 
seventy-one  had  been  saved.  Seventy-one  chapters  had  been  saved, 
and  they  conversely  state  that  twenty-nine  chapters  were  saved. 


Some  say  that  the  twenty-uine  chapters  of  the  Slmking  are 
an  imitation  of  the  Dipper  and  seven  zodiacal  constellations. 3 
Four  times  seven  gives  twenty-eiglit  chapters,  and  the  one  is  the 
Dipper,  so  that  there  would  be  the  number  of  twenty-nine.  How- 
ever, when  the  Shuking  was  destroyed  in  Ch  in,  only  twenty-nine 
chapters  remained,  how  could  there  be  any  imitation?  During  the 
reign  of  the  emperor  Hsiian  Ti  one  chapter  was  found  of  the  lost 
Shikiny,  the  Yiking,  and  tlie  Liki  each.  The  number  of  the  chapters 
of  the  Yiking  and  tlie  Liki  became  complete  then.  How  could  any 
imitation  find  its  way?  Out  of  the  scries  of  the  hundred  chapters 
of  the  Shukiiu/,  seventy-one  were  missing,  and  no  more  than  tw  enty- 
nine  still  extant.   How  should  the  imitation  have  taken  place  then*.1 

Others  hold  that  Con/iuius  selected  twenty-niue  chapters,  and 
that  these  alone  were  up  to  the  standard.  Only  common  scholars 
(ran  speak  so,  and  it  does  not  show  mur.U  wisdom  in  the  writers 

1  Writers  on  philosophy  and  science. 

2  There  are  28  stellar  niaiioiuiis  in  all,  7  for  each  cjuadrant. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statements  Corrected. 


451 


on  these  subjects.  The  twenty-nine  chapters  were  a  fragment  and 
incomplete,  and  just  on  account  of  this  difficiency  the  writers  con- 
ceived the  idea  of  the  imitation.  They  misunderstand  the  sage, 
and  their  opinion  disagrees  witli  the  facts  now  and  formerly. 


The  chapters  of  a  Classic  correspond  to  the  periods  and  clauses. 
Periods  and  clauses  still  consist  of  words.  Words  giving  a  sense 
form  a  clause,  and  a  certain  number  of  clauses  is  combined  into 
a  period.  A  complex  of  periods  gives  a  chapter.  A  chapter  there- 
fore is  a  combination  of  periods  and  clauses.  If  one  maintains  that 
the  chapters  imitate  something,  then  he  must  admit  that  periods 
and  clauses  have  their  prototype  likewise. 

In  ancient  times  the  Shiking  also  consisted  of  several  thousand 
chapters.  Confucius  expunged  a  great  many  and  made  a  revised 
edition,  retaining  but  three  hundred  chapters.  They  are  like  the 
twenty-nine  cliapters  of  the  Shuk'mg.  Provided  that  the  letter  had 
tlieir  model,  tlie  three  hundred  and  five  chapters  must  have  had 
theirs  likewise. 

Some  one  might  suggest  tliut  the  C/iun  67mm  is  a  reproduction 
of  the  twelve  months.  The  twelve  dukes  of  the  Ch  un  Ch'iu 1  are 
like  the  hundred  chapters  of  tlie  Shuking.  Since  these  chapters  are 
not  modelled  after  anything,  the  twelve  dukes  cannot  be  such  an 
imitation  either. 

Discussing  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn,"  people  have  put  forward 
the  following  theory.  During  the  two  liumlrt'd  and  forty-two  years 
of  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn  "  jxTiod,  the  people  had  excellent 
principles,  and  those  of  the  emperor  were  perfect.  The  good  were 
liked,  arid  the  vvieked  detctrted.  Revolutionists  were  led  back  to 
tlie  right  path.  Notliing  could  be  like  tlie  "  Spring  and  Autumu  " 
period  iu  this  respect.  Thus  the  principles  of  thf  people  and  of 
the  emperor  just  liappened  to  be  perfect. 

Threj*  armies  forming  six  divisions,  of  1 2,000  men,  suffice  to 
crush  an  enemy,  to  dof»'at  brigands,  and  to  put  a  stop  to  their 
attacks  on  tlie  empire,  but  it  is  not  necessary  that  they  should  be 
an  imitation  of  any  standard.  . 

When  Confucius  coinpMscd  tl"'  "  Spring'  and  Autumn,"  tilt' 
chroniol«'  of  tin;  twelve  dul<«'8  of  Lu.  it  was  lilt"  tlie  tlirt'e  annics 
forming  six  divisions.  Tin*  numlxT  of  soldiers,  12,000  in  all,  would 
correspond  to  the  l\vo-hun(ln*<l  and  forty-two  yt'ars.  Six  divisions 
consisting  of  1 2,000  soldirrs  would  suffice  to  form  an  army,  and 
twelve  dukt's  comprising  two  hundred  and  forty-two  years  would 


The  twelve  dukes  of  Lu,  whose  history  is  given  in  the  Ch'un-cUiu, 


Digitized  by  Google 


452 


Lun  -  Hcng :  E.  (Vitiijue. 


be  sufficient  to  establish  a  moral  system.  But  those  who  concern 
themsrlvos  with  these  questions,  are  very  partial  to  extravagant 
theories  and  imposing  doctrines.  In  tlieir  opinion,  the  reckless  me'-t 
with  misiortuur,  thcrfforc  the  number  of  the  chapters  of  the  clas- 
sical writings  has  always  a  certain  sense. 

Let  us  get  to  the  bottom  of  the  thiug,  and  see  what  tht'sc 
writings  an*  meant  to  bo,  and  I  am  sure  that  our  ideas  will  re- 
present the  view  of  tli,'  v«'iu'rable  m''n  who  wrote  those  books  arnl 
portrics.  Thi*  sages  an*  the  authors  of  the  (、anons，  the  worthies 
of  tin-  Classics.  Having  <'xljaustcd  a  tlicnn-  and  said  all  tliey  could 
about  it,  they  made  a  chapter  of  it.  The  subjects  、v<'iv  cogiiat", 
and  the  various  paragraphs  liomogcneous.  In  cas«>  tin*  aubjocts  、v"r<' 
hctrrogenpoiis.  and  tlw  diction  not  uniform,  they  fornu'd  a  n"、v 
chaptor.  The  si'ns'.'  being  diflVrcnt,  the  words  diflVml  too.  Thus, 
when  a  new  tlit'in*'  was  treated,  anotlirr  chapter  had  to  he  coin- 
racnerd.  All  tl«'prnd«'d  on  tlic  subj«*ct,  how  could  tl"'  number  of 
stars  be  imitaU'd? 


Concerning  tin*  two  hundred  and  forty-two  years  of  tl"'. 
" Spriug  and  Autumn  "  tlit'rr  arc  some  who  say  that  the  longest 
life  lasts  ninety  yi'ai's,  a  medium  long  one  oighty,  and  tlie  sliortrst 
long  life  seventy  )、'ars.  Confucius  took  thrt't'.  generations  of  a 
iiK'dium  long  lilV  for  his  work.  Three  times  i'ig)it  gives  t\v<'nty-lbur, 
rrgo  tWrc  are  two  liuiulrcd  and  forty  years.  Others  urge  that  this 
is  the  im'an  number  of  the  days  of  pregnancy.1  Others  again 
contend  that  during  fwo  hundred  arxl  forty-two  y'ars  the  ways 
of  tlir  people  wrrc  excellent,  and  those  of  tl"'  fmptTore  perfect. 

Now,  if  \v»*  accept  the  three  ^eiu'ratioii  t  hrory,  tlie  statrinent 
about  th»'  conduct  must  bv.  wrong,,  and,  if  w»*  (leclaro  tl", 

latter  vit'w  to  be  (； orrrct,  then  we  must  dismiss  the  theory  about 
tlie  thm'  gt'iHTations  as  rrroneous,  for  both  arc  contradictory.  I  low 
could  we  be  sure  to  bv  in  accordance  witlj  tlie  views  of  tl"'  sage, 
if  wt»  decridc  in  favour  ("'  either  of  these  opinions? 

The  addition  of  years,  months,  and  days  to  a  record  will  al- 
ways incrt*a.st'  its  accuracy.    Tlie  Five  Timekeepers  of  the  Hung-fan,'1 

1  This  translation  i.s  a  mere  guess.  力'； ^Jj|j  miglit  mean  "  rule  for  the  new- 
born." According  to  Chinese  ideas  pregnancy  lasts  7-9  months  or  210-270  days, 
whereas  we  reckon  1S2  .'^>0  days.  The  mean  number  would  be  240  or  241  days. 
Tlie  dictionaries  do  not  explain  the  expression. 

2  These  Five  Timekeepers  of  the  llnny-fan  chapter  are:  the  year,  tlie  mouth, 
tlie  day,  the  stars,  and  the  dates  of  the  calendar.  Sfmkiny,  H»ng-fan,  Pt  V，  Bk.  IV,  H 
(Legye  Vol. 【II，  Pt.  II,  p.  327). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statement  Corrected. 


45：^ 


the  years,  months,  days,  and  stars  serve  to  describe  events,  but 
have  no  reference  to  any  outwards  signs.  It  is  on  record  that  the 
years  during  w  hicli  tlie  twelve*  dukes  enjoyed  the  possession  of 
their  State  were  two  hundred  and  forty-two  altogether.  These,  at 
all  events,  liave  given  rise  to  the  three  genera  (ion  theory.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  ( 'nnftmm  in  writing  the  history  of  the  twelve  dukes, 
either  was  of  opinion  that  tlie  events  wliich  happened  under  their 
reigns  were  sul'li (； ient  to  illustrate  the  principles  of  a  sovereign,  or 
lie  took  three  generations,  and  these  three  generations  just  happened 
to  embrace*  the  time  of  the  twelve  dukes.  If  he  took  the  twelve 
dukes,  then  the  two  hundred  and  forty-two  years  were  not  regarded 
as  tliree  generations,  and  if  \w  took  three  generations,  so  that  eight 
were  multiplied  by  three,  tliis  would  give  two  hundred  and  forty, 
wliy  then  did  he  add  two  ? 

I  shall  receive  the  answer  that  he  wished  to  include  the  first 
year  of  Duke  Yin,  and  did  not  ；" Id  two  years.  Had  these  two 
years  not  been  included,  the  first  year  of  Duke  Yi/t  would  have 
been  omitted  in  the  Classic.  Provided  that  in  the  composition  of 
the  Ch  un-cliiu  the  time  for  three  generations  was  chosen  on  pur- 
pose, wherefore  was  it  necessary  to  begin  tlie  narration  from  the 
events  which  happened  during  the  first  year  of  Duke  Yin's  reign ？ 
If,  conversely,  these  events  were  required  for  tin*  beginning,  then 
only  compli-teucss  was  aimed  at,  and  it  would  be  no  use  speaking 
of  three  generations.  They  say  that  Duke  Yin  reigned  fifty  years.' 
Now,  should  a  complete  record  be  given  from  the  first  year,  or 
should  it  be  cut  in  two  to  have  the  number  of  three  times 
eight?  If  a  complete  record  from  the  first  year  was  given,  the 
number  of  three  times  eight  did  cut  it  in  two,  and,  if  it  was  cut 
in  two  with  the  object  of  obtaining  the  lull  number  of  years  for 
three  generations,  then  tlie  first  years  of  Duke  Yin  were  super- 
fluous. 

Furthermore,  a  year  di fliers  in  length  from  months  and  days, 
but  the  «•  vents,  wliicli  they  embrace,  have  all  the  same  purport. 
Sine"  the  two  liunrlrcrl  and  forty-tAvo  years  are.  believed  to  repre- 
sent three  generations,  thi'  days  and  months  of  these  two  huudroil 
and  forty-two  years  ought  to  liave  a  fixed  number  likewise.  The 
years  represent  three  gentTations,  hut  how  many  months  and  d&ys 
are  tlicre,  and  wliat  do  tliey  represent?  The  years  of  tlie  44  Spring 
and  Autumn  ，，  are  like  the  paragraphs  of  the  S/mking.   A  paragraph 


1  This  would  seem  a  misprint.    Duke 】；" of  Lu  reigned  from  721-711  B.r. 
；. e.  1 0  years,  not  f>0. 


Digitized  by  Google 


151 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


serves  to  bring  out  a  meaning,  and  a  year  to  chronicle  events. 
He  wlio  holds  tliat  the  years  oi*  the  Cktui-chiu  have  a  pro  to  typo, 
must  admit  that  the  paragraphs  of  the  Shuking  liavo  a  prototype  also. 


Writers  on  the  Yikiny  all  state  tliat  Fu  I  hi  made  the  Kiglit 
Diagrams,  and  that  Wm  Wamj  increased  them  to  sixty- four.  No、v, 
because  a  wise  emperor  rose,  the  Yellow  Hinr  produced  the  Plati 
and  the  Lo  the  Scroll.  When  Fu  Ihi  was  oiujieror,  th<'  Plan  of 
the  River  put  forward  tilt'  diagrams  of  tlic  Yikiny  from  the  watrr 
of  the  River,  and  during  Yil's  time  the  Scroll  of  the  Lo  was  ob- 
tained. It  emerged  from  the  Lo,  putting  forward  the  nine  para- 
graphs of  tlie  "  Flood  Regulation."  '  Thus  by  means  of  tin*  dia- 
grams Fu  lid  governed  the  empire,  and  Yii  put  the  " Flood  Regul- 
ation " into  practice  to  regulates  the  great  Hood. 

Of  old,  when  Li^h  S/utn^  was  on  the  throne,  he  obtained  the 
Plan  of  tlie  liiver.  The  Ihia  dynasty  took  it  over  and  called  it 
Lien-shan.  The  Plan  of  the  Hirer  obtained  by  til''  Eni])eror  JJeh 
Sh'tn  also  went  over  to  the  Yin  dynasty,  which  styled  it  Ktiei-tsan(/. 
Fu  list  came  into  possession  of  the  plau  during  his  reign,  and  tlie 
people  of  CltOH  <lenote«l  it  as  <7tou-Yi.3  I  ho  diagrams  of  this  Classic* 
were  sixtv-four  in  all.  W  t'n  Wantj  and  Cltnu  Kttng  made  a  summary 
of  them  in  eighteen  paragraphs  and  explained  the  kix  lines.4 

The  current  tradition  ou  the  Yikiug  is  that  Fu  //'«•  made  the 
eight  diagrams.  Only  he  who  keeps  on  the  surface,  can  say  tliat 
Fu  Hsi  really  composed  the  eight  diagrams.  Fu  lid  obtained  tht* 
ei^lit  diagrams,  but  di<l  not  make  them,  and  Wf'n  Waug  received 
tlie  sixty- four  quite  complete,  and  did  not  increase  them.  These 
words :  to  make  and  to  increase,  liavo  their  origin  in  the  common 
tradition.   People  lightly  believe  iu  this  statement,  and  consider  it 

1  The  chapter  of  the  Shu  king  entitled  "  Hung-fan^ 
3  Tlie  Einperor  ^h'n  Kung. 

3  The  Viking  of  the  《，hou  Dynasty,  the  only  one  which  has  come  down  lo  us. 

4  We  learn  from  the  Ti^Winig-ftlah-chi  (3d  cent.  A.n.)  tliat  Fu  Hm  made  the 
eight  diagrams,  and  that  *S7"Vi  JVunp  inrreused  them  to  sixty-four,  timing  7i,  )  ao、 
and  Shun  took  them  over,  expanded  thcin,  and  dustinguislicd  two  Yikingft.  The  //"'a 
dynasty  adopted  that  of  Sh^n  JS'ung,  and  railed  it  Lim->hany  the  I'm  dynasty  took 
the  version  of  Huany  '/V,  and  called  it  Kuri^ang.  \\'*'n  Wamj  expanded  the  sixty- 
four  diagrams,  composed  the  six  broken  and  unbroken  lines  of  which  they  were 
formed,  and  called  it  Clunt  Yim 

Others  think  that  L;m-、f"m  is  another  name  of  Fu  //«'，  and  KnH-t^ng  a 
designation  of  Huany  J  i. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statements  Corrected. 


455 


as  true,  whereas  the  truth  is  nearly  forgotten.  Not  knowing  that 
the  Yiking  is  the  Plan  of  tlie  River, 1  they  are  not  aware  either 
to  which  dynasty  the  different  Yikings,  still  extant,  belong.  Some- 
times it  is  the  Lten-shan  or  the  Ktm-Lsang  Yiking 、  and  sometimes 
the  Yiking  of  the  Clum  dynasty. 

The  amplifications  and  abridgements  which  the  Books  of  Rites 
underwent  under  the  Hsh,  Yin,  and  Clioti  dynasties  vary  very  much. 
If.  because  the  Chou  dynasty  is  the  last  of  the  three,  our  present 
Yiking  is  regarded  as  that  of  the  Chou  dynasty,  then  the  lAki  ought 
to  be  from  the  Chou  time  also.  But,  since  the  44  Six  Institutions " 
do  not  tally  with  the  present  Liki、  the  latter  cannot  be  that  of 
the  Chou  dynasty.  Thus  it  becomes  doubtful  too,  whether  our 
Yiking  dates  from  tlie  Chou  epoch. 

Since  Tso  Ch  in  Ming,2  who  in  his  commentary  quotes  the 
authors  of  tlie  Chou  dynjinty,  uses  diagrams  which  agree  with  our 
modern  Yiking^  it  is  most  likely  the  Yiking  of  the  Chou  period. 
The  writers  on  tlie  IAki  all  know  that  the  Liki  is  the  Liki,  but 
to  whicli  dyuasty  docs  it  belong? 

Confucius  says,3  "  The  Yin  dynasty  continued  the  Rites  of  the 
Usid',  wherein  it  amplified  or  abridged  tliem,  may  be  known.  The 
Chou  dynasty  lias  continue<l  tlie  Rites  of  tlie  Yin;  wlierein  it  am- 
plified or  abridged  them,  may  be  known."  Accordingly  the  Hsia 
as  well  as  the  Yin  and  Chou  all  had  their  own  Liki.  Now  is  our 
own  the  (.'hou  Liki  or  that  of  the  llsia  or  Yin  dynasties? 

If  they  hold  that  it  is  tlie  Chou  JAki,  one  must  object  tliat 
the  Rites  of  the  Chou  had  the  Six  Institutions,4  whereas  our  Liking 
does  not  oontaiti  them.  Perhaps  at  tliat  time  the  Yin  Liki  was 
not  yet  extinct,  and  the  Liki  with  the  Six  Institutions  was  not 
handed  down.  Consequently  ours  has  been  regarded  as  the  Chou 
Li.  The  Official  System  of  the  Ch(nth  does  not  agree  with  tlie  pre- 
sent Uki、  it  must  be  the  Chou  Liki  with  the  Six  Institutions  therefore, 
but  it  is  not  being  handed  down,  just  as  the  Shukingy  the  Cli  un-ch  t«, 
and  the  Tso-c/man  in  ancient  characters  are  not  much  in  vogue. 

1  The  tradition  about  the  Plan  of  the  River  and  the  Scroll  of  the  Lo  is  very 
old.  We  find  traces  of  it  in  the  Yiking,  the  Liki,  the  Shuking,  and  tlie  Analects. 
Cf.  Legges  translaiion  of  ttie  Yikiny,  p.  14. 

1  The  author  of  tlie  Tso-chuan. 

s  AnalecU  11,  23，  2. 

4  The  Six  InstitutioiiN  or  depart  men"  of  the  Chou :  administration,  instruction, 
rites,  police,  jurisdiction,  and  public  welfare.  Cf.  ('hou-li,  I3k.  II,  T  ien-kuan.  (Biot's 
Iramlntion,  Vol.  I，  p.  20.) 

&  Now  known  as  the  Cfum-li. 


Digitized  by  Google 


15(； 


Lun-Hcng:  F.  Critique. 


Those  wlio  treat  of  the  Analects  morely  kiuiw  how  to  discourse 
on  the  text,  and  to  explain  the  meaning,  but  they  do  not  know 
the  original  number  of  the  books  of  the  Analects.  During  the  I'I'on 
tim<'  eight  inches  wore  rfckonod  to  om'  foot.1  They  tlo  not  know 
for  what  reason  the  sizo  of  tlie  AnaJeats  was  only  one  foot.  Tlie 
Analects  are  notes  on  the  sayings  and  doings  of  (hn/ucius,  made  by 
his  disciples.  It  happt'iiod  very  often  that  lie  corrected  them.  Many 
tens  of  hundreds  of  books  thus  originated.  For  writing  them  down 
the  size  of  one  foot  of  eight  inclies  was  rhosen,  as  it  was  more 
economical,  and  the  books  could  be  kept  in  the  bosom  more  con- 
venieutly.  Because  the  sayings  left  by  the  sage  were  not  to  be 
found  in  thv  Classics,  the  pupils  were  afraid  lest  they  should  for- 
get them,  、vheu  recording  from  memory,  ""'refore  tbey  only  used 
books  of  one  foot  like  eight  inches,  and  not  of  two  feet  four  inches. 

At  tin*  atM-cssion  of  tlie  Han  dynasty  the  Atia/ects  had  been 
lost.  When  under  \Yu  li  s  reign  tlie  wall  of  tlie  house  of  (hn/ucuis 
was  pierced,2  twenty-<»np  hooks  in  ancieut  characters  were  brought 
to  liglit.  Between  the  two  rivers  of  ( 'h  i  and  Ln3  nine  books  were 
discovered,  whicli  makes  thirty  together.  The  daughter  of  the  Em- 
]>eror  Chno  7V4  read  tweuty-one  books.  When  the  Emperor  fh-Oan 
7 V 5  sent  them  down  to  the  scholars  of  the  court  of  sacrificial  wor- 
sliip,  tliry  still  (leclarod  that  the  work  was  hard  to  understand, 
and  callod  it  a  record.  Afterwards  it  was  transcribed  in  Li  cha- 
ractersfl  to  give  it  a  wider  publicity.  First  the  grandson  of  ( onftuius, 
K  ung  An  K'io,  explained  it  to  h'ti  Clihig^  a  native  of  Lu.  Wlieu 
the  latter  became  governor  of  Ching-cliou^  lie  lir^t  railed  it  AnaJtcU.* 
Now  we  speak  of  tlie  twenty  books  ot'  the  Analects.9 


1  Under  the  dynasty  the  foot  had  ten  inches,  under  tlie  Yin  nine,  under 
the  Chou  eight.  Now  it  has  ten  inches  again  The  foot  of  the  ( 'hou  time  measured 
but  about  20  cm.,  whereas  the  mud  em  foot  is  eijuul  to  3.*>  om. 

s  By  Princf  Kung.    Vid.  above  p.  1 1^. 

3  It  is  not  plain  wliioh  rivers  arc  meant.  They  must  liavc  been  at  the  frontier 
of  the  two  coiiteruiinous  States.  Tlit  re  、v:w  the  ( 'hi  River,  wliirli  in  (  h  i  was  railed 
the  Chi  of  Ch  i,  and  in        tlie  (  hi  ol'  Lu. 

*  t*6-74  b.c. 

5  73  41>  n.r. 

6  The  mas.sive  U  charactors  were  invented  during  the  Han  time  and  form 
tlie  link  between  the  ancient  seal  charactccs  and  the  modern  form  of  script. 

7  A  place  in  llupti  province. 

*  Analects  ―  Lun-yu. 

9  Our  text  of  the  lAtn-yu  consists  of  twenty  books.    In  the  Him  time  there 

were  two  cditinos  of  the  Classic,  one  of  Lu  in  twenty  books  and  one  of  fki  in 
twenty-two. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statements  Corrected. 


4f>7 


The  nine  books  found  between  the  rivers  of  (hi  and  Lu 
have  again  been  lost.  Originally  fliciv  were  thirty,  but  by  tl»c 
transmission  of  separate  books,  sonic  have  disappeared.  Those 
twenty-one  books  may  be  too  many  or  too  few,  and  the  inter- 
pretation of  tlie  text  may  1"'  correct  or  erroneous,  the  critics  of 
tlie  Lnn-ifu  do  not  care,  they  only  know  how  to  ask  knotty  questions 
concerning  the  explanation  of  ambiguous  passages,  or  lind  diffi- 
culties in  all  sorts  of  minutiae.  They  do  not  ask  about  the  origin 
of  the  work,  which  has  been  preserved,  or  the  number  of  its  books 
or  its  chapters.  Only  thosr  well  voi-sed  in  antique  lore,  who  also 
understand  the  present  time  should  become  teachers,  why  do  wo 
now  call  teachers  men  who  know  nothing  about  antiquity? 


Mew-ins  said,  "The  traces  of  tlie  old  emperors  were  obliterated, 
and  the  Odes  forgotten,  wheu  the  ('/,"〃-('/'''•"  was  comjiost'd.  The 
Clieny  of  Chin  and  tlie  T  ao-tcn  of  Cli  u  correspond  to  tin-  Ch' un- 
ch'in  of  Im."  1 

As  Mencius  states,  ( h  un-ch  in  was  tlie  name  of  the  history  of 
Lu  like  the  Ch' f'ny  and  the  T  ao-wu.^  Con/tu-ius  preserved  the  old 
namo  and  styled  it  the  CU  un-ch  iu  Classic.  This  is  by  no  means  a 
queer  expression,  nor  has  it  any  other  sense  or  any  deep  ;md  excellent 
meaning.  The  ordinary  scholars  of  the  present  day  contend  with 
reference  to  tlu*  C'h  un-ch  iu,  that  i'h' nn  (Spring)  is  tlie  beginning 
and  ch  iu  (Autuimi)  the  end  of  the  year.  Tl"、  Ch  un-ch  iu  Classic 
can  feed  the  young  and  afford  nourislunent  to  the  old,  whence  the 
designation  Ch  un-ck  iu  (Spring  and  Autumn).  But  wlicrein  docs  the 
CK un-ch  in  difl'or  from  the  Sliuhmg^  The  Shuking  is  regarded  as  the 
book  of  the  emperors  of  remotest  antiquity,  or  people  think  that 
it  contains  the  deeds  of  the  an'-ients,  which  were  written  down  by 
tlieir  successors.  At  all  events,  the  facts  and  the  mode  of  trans- 
mission art*  both  in  accordance  witli  tnith,  and  so  is  tlio  name. 
People  were  not  nt  a  loss  what  to  say,  and  then  roneocted  a 
meaning,  so  that  the  expression  seemed  .strange.  Those  dealing 
witli  the  Shukimj  speak  the  truth  about  it,  whereas  those  concerni'd 
witli  the  Ch  un-ch  in,  liave  missed  tlie  meaning  of  the  Sage. 

We  read  in  the  comment.arv  of  tlie  Ch  un-cft  iu.  the  Tso-c/inan^ 
that  during  the  seventeenth  year  of  Duke  Iluon's  reign,3  in  winter, 

1  Mencius  Bk.  IV,  Pt. 【1,  chap.  21.  . 

s  The  ineaniii);  of  the  names  of  tliesc  old  clironirles,  *  'hi'ng  and  T'ao-tru, 
is  as  obscure  as  that  of  the  (  h  un-ch'in. 
3  710-G93  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


45S 


Lun  -  H<ng  ：  K.  Critujue. 


in  the  tenth  month,  the  first  day  of  tlie  moon,  the  sun  was 
eclipsed.1  The  day  is  nut  mentioned,  bewuise  tlie  responsible  of- 
ficer had  lost  it. 

The  idea  that,  the  official  hud  lost  tlie  day  is  correct,'-  1  dare 
say.  The  historiographer  had  to  record  the  events,  as  in  our 
times  the  district  magistrates  keep  their  books.  Years  and  motilli.s 
are  long  and  difficult  to  be  lost,  diiya  are  short  and  may  easily  be 
forgotten.  Good  aud  bad  actions  arc  recorded  for  the  sake  ai' 
trufli,  aud  no  import anco  is  attached  to  days  and  months. 

In  the  commentaries  of  hung  Yang  aud  Am  Liang 3  days  and 
months  are  not  mentioned  at  all.  That  is  on  purpose.  To  omit 
usual  tilings  and  use  queer  expressions,  and  to  give  an  ambiguous 
im'aiiiiig  to  straightforward  words  would  not  be  to  ('<mf，tchis，  mind. 
In  reality  Clt  un-ch  iu  (Spring  and  Autumn)  refers  to  the  Summer 
also.  That  it  is  not  mentioned  is  like  the  omission  of  days  and 
months. 


T  any,  Yil,  Usui,  Yin,  and  Cftou  are  territorial  names.  Yao  as- 
cended the  tlirone  as  in  a  i-quis  of  T  ang,x  Shun  rose  to  power  from 
tl)e  Yil  territory.5  Yil  came  from  I J  sin 0  and  T  ang 7  from  Yin^  when 
they  began  their  brilliant  careers.  Wit  Wang  relied  on  Chon 9  to  Oght 
liis  battles.  They  all  ic^arded  the  country,  from  which  they  had 
taken  their  origin,  as  their  basis.  Out  of  regard  lor  their  native 
land,  which  tlioy  never  forgot,  they  used  its  name  as  their  style, 
.just  as  people  have  tlieir  surnames.  The  critics  on  the  Shukhuj. 
however,  assort  that  the  dynnstic  names  of  the  ruling  emperors, 
tsuch  as  T  mil/.  Yii.  IfsUi,  Yin ,  and  ( hou,  are  expressive  of  their 
virtue  and  gl"iy,  and  descriptive  of  tlieir  grandeur. 

/'  nnff  means  majesty,  they  say,  Yil  j<>\%  Ilsia  greatness,  Yin  to 
flourish,  aud  C/iou  to  reach.  Yao's  majesty  was  such,  that  tlie  people 
had  no  adequate  name  for  it,  S/mn  was  thr  joy  and  the  bliss  of 
tlie  world,  Yil  got  the  heritage  of  the  two  emperors,  and  once  more 

1  (  h  un-ch' iu  II，  17.  8. 

- I,  t.  tho  day  of  tlie  sexagenary  cycle,  for  the  day  of  the  month  is  mentioned. 

3  Two  other  coimneiitarics  to  tlie  Cfi  un-thiu,  less  important  than  tlie  T^o-chuan. 

4  Tang  was  situated  in  Pao-ting-fu  (Chili). 
'- In  >Arimi. 

f'  In  K'ai-fmg-fu  (Honan). 

7  (  fit'ny  Tang,  the  founder  of  tlie  Yin  {Shang)  dynasty. 

h  A  principality  in  llon-in. 

9  The  kingdom  of  <  Itou  in  Shen.". 


Digitized  by  Google 


Statcinents  Corrcctod. 


150 


established  the  majesty  of  the*  moral  laws,  so  tli.it  (he  prople  had 
no  adftiuatc  name  for  him.  Uiulrr  I'  ang  ("•  tho  Yin  morality  nour- 
ished, and  the  i^Iory  and  virtue  W'u  Wnutj  of  C/iou  reached  every- 
where. The  scholars  have  found  very  nirt'  meanings,  indeed,  and 
bestowed  great  praise  on  these  five  rei^niny;  houses,  but  thvy  arc 
in  opposition  to  the  real  trutli,  and  liave  miscoucoived  tlu*  primary 
idea.  The  houses  of  'tiing,  >'«,  Ihi/i,  Yin  and  C/iou  bear  tlicir  names 
just  as  llu'  Chin  and  I  fan  <U*  rlieirs.  T\w  i'liin  rose  from  i,l""'、 
and  the  Hon  started  1'roni  Ilan-cltnuff.-  Then- fore  they  still  kept 
tlie  names  of  Ch  in  and  Han.  Similarly  Wang  Mnng  seized  the 
supreme  jiowit  a,s  a  marquis  of  //.,■'•/'-/",  ； m<l  for  this  reason  was 
called  doomed  Ilsin.  Had  the  Ch  in  and  the  Han  flourished  anterior 
to  the  classiral  writings,  tlie  critics  would  surely  have  explained 
the  words  L'h  in  and  Hon  as  meaniug  morality  and  virriu*. 


Wlien  Y<u>  was  old  and  wished  to  yield  the  throne,  the  Chief 
ot*  the  Four  Mountains  '  recoinmemUvl  S/itin.  Yno  said,  "1  will  try 
him." 6  The  commentators  of  the  Sltukiny  maintain  that  this  signi- 
fies, " I  will  use  liim,  iKimely ：  —  I  will  uso 】山" and  make  him 
emperor."    To  Tnake  him  omperor,  is  to  hv  understood. 

The  text  goes  on.  "  I  will  、vivc  In  in.  and  then  obscrvo  his 
behaviour  with  mv  two  (laughters.''  I'o  observe  incaiis  nothing 
more  than  that  •、•/'"〃  is  to  show  himscll"  to  tlie  world,  they  snv, 
it  does  not  imply  that  Yao  hiinsolf  is  going  to  ol»servc  liim.  Two 
such  extraordinary  men  like  Ydo  and  ,、'/,"/'，  who  are  n'gardt-'l  as 
sages,  must  have  known  ("it,  aimthcT  at  first  sigl".  Tliere  was  no 
need  (or  any  trial  or  ol)s<'rvation.  I  hc  flashes  of  their  ^rnius 
meeting,  rhey  felt  an  unliinitod  rmiridi'm't'  in  «'acli  (ither. 

W»l  read  further  on : —— " 'l'l"'  four  (juarti*rs  of  (lio  einpire  wore 
all  suhinissivi*.  Heinf;  8cut  to  tlie  ^rcni  plains  at  tin*  loot  of  the 
mountains,  amid  violenf  wind,  thunder  and  rain,  he  did  not  astray."11 

Ta  U1  (tlir  groat  plains  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains)  is  tlie 
office  of  tlie  three  prime  ministers,  thry  say.     Filling  the  post  of 

1  Tl"，  kingdom  of  Chi"  in  »".、.'■. 

J  In  .、7w'"i. 

， iVint-ipality  iti  ^(in-yniKj-fn  (//''/,"")• 

4  Tiic  prfsidt'iit  of  all  tlie  noMes  ot'  tlio  enijiirr. 

»  Shaking  Vao-Hm,  Pt.  I,  Bk.  Ill,  12  {Ugge  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  p. 

«  Shukivf,  ,、/,""<•"，  Pt.  II.  Hk.  I.  1  (/f  Vol.111,  Pt.  I,  p.  31). 

， 大麓' 


Digitized  by  Google 


460 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


one  minister,  S/iim  had  to  act  as  registrar-general,  the  duties  of  the 
two  other  ministers  \Vere  manifold,  but  in  all  he  was  equally  suc- 
cessful like  violent  wind  and  powerful  rain-sliowers. 

Now,  inspite  of  their  great  ability  sages  do  not  always  know- 
each  other,  although  tliey  be  sages  in  fact.  $/mn  found  it  diffiotilt 
to  know  the  cunning,  wherefore  lie  employed  Kao  Yao  '，  who  slio\vo<l 
a  great  knowledge  of  men.  Cunning  people  are  hard  to  know,  and 
sages  are  difficult  to  find  out.  Yno's  genius  was  like  S/um's  know- 
ledge : S/mn  knew  cunniug  people,  and  Yao  knew  sa^c^.  When  Yao 
had  heard  of  Shun  s  virtue,  aud  that  he  was  recommended  by  the 
Chief  of  tho  Four  Mountains,  lie  knew  that  he  was  an  extraordin- 
ary man,  but  lie  was  not  yet  sure  of  his  ability.  Therefore  he 
said,  "  I  will  try  liim,"  and  he  tried  him  in  an  office  and  gave 
him  his  two  daughters  in  marriage  to  see,  how  he  would  behave 
as  husband.  He  tilled  his  posts  irreproachably,  nor  did  he  deviate 
from  the  right,  path  of  matrimony.  Then  Yao  again  bade  all  the 
people  go  into  the  country  and  observe  his  sagehood.  Shun  braved 
storm  and  rain-showers,  and  did  not  go  astray.  Then  Yao  knew 
that  he  was  a  sage  aud  entrusted  him  with  the  empire.  If  the 
text  sfieaks  of  observing  and  trying,  it  means  to  observe  and  to 
try  his  ability. 

The  coinmontatt)rs  regard  tliis  expression  as  figurative  and  by 
adding  to  and  einlicliishing  the  text  they  distort  everything,  and 
do  not  preserve  the  true  sense.  Their  misinterpretations  quite  spoil 
the  meaning.  Thus  the  wrong  explanations  are  transmitted  to 
posterity  uninterruptedly,  and  fanciful  comments  obscure  the  truth 
ever  since. 

Intelligent  persons  wishing  to  understand  the  Canons  do  not 
£；<)  back  to  tlie  original  meanings,  and  even  if  they  do,  they  still 
comparr  tlie  old  commentaries,  and  adopt  the  old  explanations, 
which  have  been  several  times  repeated,  and  look  upon  them  as 
proofs.  W  hat  \vah  been  handed  down  about  the  Canons  cannot  be 
n-Iied  upon,  for  the  erroneous  statements  about  the  Five  Canons 
arc  very  numerous.  The  facts  and  tl»e  texts  of  the  Shuking  and 
the  C/i nn-c/t' iu  are  comparably  plain  and  intelligible,  therefore  my 
remarks  apply  espeoially  to  thorn. 

1  Minister  of  Crime  under  Shun. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Bookn. 


K5I 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 
Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Books  {An-shu). 

Thf  Confucianists  look  uj>  to  Confucius  as  the  founder  of  their 
school,  、、- l"、r，'as  i\w  M,'liists  regard  Me  Ti  as  tlu'ir  master.1  Thr 
Confucian  (loctrim,  has  conic  down  to  us,  that  of  Ti  lifts  fallrn 
into  tl'suctu 山'， b»'caus<*  the  Confucian  principles  can  be  put  in  uso, 
whili*  tin*  Mchist  system  is  very  difficult  to  practise.    I  low  so  ? 

The  Mehists  ne^loct  tl"'  burials,  but  honour  th«'  ghosts.  Their 
doctriiK;  is  abnormal,  sclf-ooiitradictory,  and  irm'oncilable  with 
truth,  thrroforc  it  is  hard  to  practise.   Which  art'  its  anomalies? 

Provided  tliat  gliosts  an-  not  the  spirits  of  the  (U>part<'(l,  tliou 
they  can  have  no  knowlrdgo  of  the  honour  shown  them.  Now 
the  Meliists  aver,  tliat  tl"'  ghosts  arc  ind,'('(l  tl"'  spirits  of  the 
dt*ad.  They  troat  tl"'  souls  well,  and  n,'gli'ct  tl"'  corpses.  Thus 
they  arc  grnorous  to  the  spirits  and  mean  with  r《'f<'r，'ncc  to  tli'-ir 
bodies.  Since  g，'m'rosity  and  incannoss  do  not  harnioni/t',  and  tin* 
externals  and  iutornals  do  uot  a^n'»',  tin-  spirits  would  lrsrnt  it, 
and  send  misfortunes  down  upon  tlu'ir  votaries.  Though  then* 
iniglit  b«'  gliosts,  they  would,  at  any  rat",  be  animat，'(l  by  a  deadly 
liatn*d.  Human  natun'  is  su (； h,  that  it  Iikrs  gcrnTosity,  and  il,'t''sts 
meanu(>88.  Thf  fivlin^s  of  tl"'  spirits  must  be  very  much  tl"'  sam«'. 
According  to  'Jse's  pn-i^pts  oii««  would  worship  tin-  ghosts,  ami 
pray  for  happiness,  but  tl"'  happiness  obtained  tht'reby  would  be 
very  scare'',  and  inisf'ortuiH'  on  misfortuin'  would  b''  the  result. 
This  is  but  on''  instance  anioug  a  hundred,  but  tin*  rntin'  Mi'hist 
system  is  like  that.  Tl"'  cans*'  that  it  liiu"  lost  its  ground,  and  is 
not  being  handod  down,  it)  contained  tli«'r«'iu. 


1  M>'  Ti,  the  pliilusuplier  of  universal  love,  a  younger  i-oiiteiiiporary  of  Con- 
fucian, 5th  or  4tl)  cenu  B.r.    Cf.  K.  Fobrr,  Lrhre  (Us  I'hibw/ihm  MiihM,  Klberleld 
1877  (Kxtracls  1'roni  Wxh  works). 


Digitized  by  Google 


4r»2 


Luti  -  Hcng :  E.  Criti«]ue. 


Tlx*  Tao-chuan  of  tho  (  liun-ch'hi 1  was  recovered  from  the  wall 
of  the  liouse  of  Confucius.  Under  the  reign  of  the  JMiipcror  Hsiao 
Wu  It,  Priuct*  Kung  of  Lu  <U'inr>lislird  th<*  school  of  Confucius  for 
the  purpose  of  l)uil(liug  a  j»alao<'.  Tlierc  lie  found  thirty  books 
of  the  Ch  un-ch  i",  wliicli  had  b,'，>ii  concealed.2  Th«'s«'  wen1  tin* 
Tso-chnnn.  Kttnf/  Yaug  K'.w,  Ku  Lmntf  <  'li  ih 3  and  Hit  Mn 4  all  trans- 
mitted the  Ch  nn-ch  iu,  rrprt'scntiiig  different  schools,  but  tli«*  com- 
mentary of  Tso  Ch  iu  Ming  alono  was  in  tiiiK*  the  ucart-st  to  Con- 
fucius and  did  embody  the  right  viows: 

Tli''  Liki  was  <:omposrd  in  the  school  of  Ccnfucim.  The  Grand 
Annalist  (the  author  of  tht*  Shi-c/ii)  was  a  man  of  great  talruts  in 
tlic  Han  tim«'.  Now  t\w  statrmcnts  of  7Vo  C/i'iu  Miny  art'  in  acconl- 
anct*  with  tht'st*  two  books,5  wlicrras  tin*  writings  of  Kumj  Yau(j 
Kao、  Ku  Li/mg  Ch  ,7'  and  fh,  Mu  diflVr  \<tv  much.  Brsidrs  tin's'- 
w ritt»rs  an*  too  far  n'inoti'  from  < 'oiifiwius.  It  is  mucti  bcttrr  to 
be  near,  than  to  be  distant,  and  better  to  see,  than  to  know  by 
hearsay. 

Liu  Tse  ( 'hen<j  niock«  (l  at  tlir  7:、,'  ( '/nuin^  wheroas  his  servants. 
Ilis  wilV.  and  liis  sons  us«h1  to  m，it''  it.  At  Kuttng  Wit  It  s"  time 
Ch  en  Yuan  and  Fan  S/m^  reported  to  tl»<*  throne  on  tht'  Tm-chuaiK 
collocting  all  the  tacts  and  giving  their  opinions  on  tin'  pros  and 
cons.  Tlion  tlic  fame  of  T.、'"  Ch  in  Ming  brcanu'  cstablishccl.  Fan 
S/m  soon  ai'trr  was  ilismisscd  for  an  oflVncc.  C/t  <'u  Yuan  and  Fan 
SJtu  \v«'r«*  tli«'  most  talciitrd  men  of  the  empire.  In  their  arguirn'uts 
tin  tl>e  merits  of  tin*  Tso  ('hum  thry  display  a  r«*  mark  able  vigour. 
( 'A  t'n  Y"""  ua*'d  to  c\|)ri'ss  lunist'lf  vrry  cautiously  and  Fan  S/nt's 
criticisms  、、- ，'iv  sili'ruM'd.1'  it  bcoani«'  I'vidrtit  that  Tso  ( 'It  in 

Miny  gives  us  thr  trutli. 


1  In  the  opinion  of  most  ( 'liinesc  (！ ritirs  tlie  ( 'hun-vh hi,  i\»  we  have  it.  has 
nut  been  preserved,  but  was  rt'CDiistructcd  iVom  the  Tto-vhuan  or  from  the  other 
••nminentaries.  This  view  is  supported  by  what  \\  aug  (  Kung  says  here.  Sec  mi 
this  <juci»tioii  h(/ffr,  IVnlrgoin'mi  to  /">  (ranslution  »f  thf  <  h'un-ch'iu,  p.  Hi 

2  Cf.  abovt-  pp.  \  \H  and  {：>6. 

3  h'tmg  }•",','/  and  hu  Linmj  arc  thf  .surnames,  h<io  and  (  h'ih  tlie  personal 

naiiie.s. 

4  Hu  Mua  coiiiiiuMitary  is  not  iii«>ntioiied  in  tlic  Catalogue  of  (lie  //""-xA〃. 
6  To  wit  the  Liki  and  tlie  S/,i-r/ti. 

n  Liu  7>'  (  h>'ny      Liu  H.tia  uj,  SM-1»  n.c,  \v;is  an  aduiircr  of  tlie  conimentary 
o('  Ku  Liuriff,  whereas  liis  son  Liu  H.siu  .stuod  u\>  lor  the  ''/，.《« '-(•/"/«». 
" 25  :V7  \.t». 

8   Fan  Shu  alias  Fan  Sh'ny. 

Fan  Shu  in  his  rejioil  to  the  throne  had  attacked  tlie  Txo-rhuan  on  four- 
teen point's. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Books.  4t)^ 

To  relate  marvellous  stories  is  not  at  all  in  tlie  stylo  of  Con- 
fucius, who  did  not  speak  of  strange  things.  The  Lil-sltUt-cli  un-cK  iu 1 
e.  g.  belongs  to  this  class  of  works.2  Tlu*  Kuo-yil  is  tlie  exoteric 
narrative  of  Tso  Ch  in  Ming.  Because  the  text  of  the  Tso-chiMn  Classic 
is  rather  concise,  b«  still  made  extracts  and  edited  the  text  of  the 
Kuo-yil  to  corroborate  the  Tso-chitan.  Thus  the  Kuo-yil  of  Tso  Ch'iu 
Ming  is  a  book  which  the  Literati  of  our  time  regard  as  genuine. 


Kunff  Sun  Lung  wrote  a  treatise  on  the  hard  and  white.3  He  split 
words,  dissected  expressions,  and  troubled  about  equivocal  terras. 
His  investigations  have  no  principles  and  are  of  no  use  for  government. 

Tsott  Yen  in  Clt  i  published  three  works  which  are  vague  and 
diffuse;4  lie  gives  very  few  proofs,  but  his  words  startle  the  reader. 
Men  of  great  talents  are  very  often  led  astray  by  their  imagination 
and  show  a  great  lack  of  critical  a<iumen.  Their  style  is  brilliant, 
but  there  is  notliiDg  in  it.  and  their  words  are  imposing,  but  their 
researches  are  conspicuous  by  the  absence  of  sober  judgment. 

When  Sfiant/  Yang 5  was  minister  of  Ch  in,  he  developed  the 
system  of  agriculture  and  lighting,  aud,  when  Kuan  Chung^  held 
the  same  position  in  Ch' i、  he  wrote  tlie  book  on  weight.  He  made 
the  people  wealthy,  the  State  prosperous,  the  sovereign  powerful, 
and  tlie  enemies  weak,  and  adjusted  rewards  and  punishments.  His 
work 7  is  classed  together  with  that  of  Tsou  Yen,  but  the  Grand 
Annalist  has  two  different  rerords  about  them.8  People  are  per- 
plexed thereby,  and  at  a  loss,  which  view  to  take. 

' An  important  work  on  antique  lore  composed  under  the  patronage  of  Prince 
Lit  l\t  Wei  in  the  3d  cent.  b.c. 

*  Works  relating  marvellous  stories. 

*  Cf.  my  paper  on  the  ( 'hinexc  Sophuils,  Journal  of  (he  f'hin"  Branch  of  thr 
H.  As.  Soc"  Shangliai  I8!l'.>,  p.  29  and  appendix  containing  a  translation  of  the  remains 
of  this  philosopher. 

«  Cf.  p.  2b:i. 

5  UVi  Vuiuf,  Prince  of  Sh'wy,  a  great  reformer  of  tlie  eivi)  ； ii、d  military  ml- 
miiiistration  of  tlie  <  'hin  State,  wliicli  lie  raised  to  great  power.    Dii>d  33S  b.c. 

'.' One  of  the  most  coif l>ratorl  stati^tiicn  ol'  antiquity,  who  di«'d  in  (i4*»  k.c. 

7  A  spcoulativt:  work  wliicli  parses  under  tlie  title  of  Kuan  '!，，'.  The  one 
still  in  existence  is  perhaps  a  later  forgery. 

s  »  Ma  Chun  extols  /、.〃'〃,  (  huuy  (Shi-chi  cliap.  62,  p.  2v)  and  finds  fault 
with  S/tanff  Yant/  (Shi-chi  chap.  «)S,  p. «.)),  althougli,  in  W  ary  Chung  a  ojiinion,  their 
deeds  and  their  tlieorie.s  are  \cry  similar.  It  must  \w  noted,  however,  that  Shtmt/ 
1  any'n  criminal  laws  were  very  cruel.  Wany  Ch'ting,  who  is  to  .i  certain  extent 
imbued  with  Taoist  ideas,  feels  a  natural  aversion  to  all  forms  of  government,  nnd 
tn  legislation  in  particular. 


Digitized  by  Google 


4il\ 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critk|ue. 


Clutng  Yi  was  a  contemporary  of  Su  CI"".  When  the  latter 
died,  Chang  Yi  was  certainly  informed  of  it.  .Since  he  must  have 
known  all  the  details,  his  words  ought  to  have  served  as  has\»  to 
fix  the  thruth.  However,  the  reports  are  not  clear,  there  being 
two  versions.  Chang  Sltany  of  Tttny-hai 1  also  wrote  a  biography. 
Wa«  Su  (、h' i"  an  inventiun  of  Chany  Slmug,  ior  liow  is  it  possible 
that  there  is  such  a  discrepancy  between  llie  two  versions? 

In  the  Gein'alogi<ral  I'ablcs  of  Tlireo  Dynasties2  it  is  said 
that  tlie  Five  Emperors  and  Three  HuUts  w»tc  all  descondants  of 
Htmtuj  7V,  and  that  from  //'"〃*,/  Ti  downward  they  were  successively 
born  without  being  again  informed  by  the  breath  of  heaven.  In 
the  special  record  of  the  Yin  dynasty 3  we  ivad,  liowover,  that 
C/ii^it  Ti,*  the  mother  of  //>■'■>'/', 5  while  bntliing  in  a  river,  met  a 
black  bird,  whicli  droppod  an  cgif.  Si"'  swallowed  it,  and  sub- 
srqncntly  gave  birth  to  IJsk'h.^ 

In  the  special  record  of  (lie  ( 7/o«7  dynasty  \vc  It  ml  tlie  notice 
that  tlie  inotlior  oi'  Lord  ( hi,  Cltmug  Ynajt,f  while  going  intu  the 
country,  ^aw  the  loot  prints  of  a  giant.  When  slic  stept  into  them, 
she  hetramo  wilh  cliikl,  and  gave  birth  to  Lord  Chi.9 

Now  we  learn  from  the  (lenealugical  Tal)l(、s  that  Ihieh  and 
Lord  Chi  wore  both  desccndaiits  of  Uunng  Ti,  whereas  \vti  read  iu 
the  records  of  (ho  Y"'  and  ( 'lunt  clynastii's  that  tliey  wore  conceived 
from  tlie  spcrni  of  the  black  bird  and  tlie  giant.  Tlieso  two  ver- 
sions ought  not  to  be  transmitted  simultaneously,  yet  tlie  Great 
Annalist  recorded  tlieni  both  indiscriminately.  Tlie  consorts  of  em- 
perors sliould  not  stroll  into  tlie  country  or  bathe  in  a  river.  Now 
the  one  is  said  to  have  bathed  in  a  river,  and  to  liave  swallowed 
the  egg  of  a  black  l>ir(l，  and  the  other  went  into  tlie  country,  and 
there  walkt'tl  in  the,  l'ootprints  of  a  j^iant.  That  is  against  all  the 
laws  of  (lecoruni  and  a  mixing  up  of  tlie  distinrtions  between  right 
and  wrong. 

A  place  in  Kimujtni. 
Shi-ihi  chap.  13. 
Sh"!,i  chap.  3. 

St:coii«l  wife  of  the  Emperor  A  m. 
The  lirst  ancestor  of  the  Yin  dynasty. 
Shi-i'f"  chap.  3,  j).  1. 
Shi-chi  chap.  4,  p.  1. 
First  wife  of  tlie  Emperor  K  u. 

U"u  (  hi       "  Lord  <»f  the  Soil,"  the  ancestor  of  the  '  hou  dynasty. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Books. 


465 


The  "  New  Words "!  is  the  work  of  Lu  Chia^  which  was 
appreciated  very  much  by  Tung  Chung  Shu.3  It  deals  with  sovereigns 
and  subjects,  good  and  bad  government,  the  words  are  worth  re- 
membering, the  facts  related,  excellent,  and  show  a  great  amount 
of  knowledge.  They  may  supplement  the  Classics;  although  there  . 
is  not  much  to  be  added  to  the  words  of  the  old  sages,  at  all 
events  th^ro  is  nothing  amiss  with  Lu  Cltias  words.  The  utterances 
of  Tung  Chung  Shu,  on  the  other  hand,  about  tlie  rain  sacrifices 
respomling  to  heaven  and  the  earthen  dragon  attracting  the  rain 
are  very  obscure.4 

Droughts  will  happen  in  consequence  of  tlie  rain  sacrifices 
(being  in  disorder),  but  have  nothing  to  do  witli  the  state  sacrilii-es 
of  the  Hsi/i  dynasty.  Was  tlie  niarquis  of  Chin  responsible,  or  was 
his  administration  defective,  so  that  the  Yang  and  the  Yin  were  not 
in  harmony?  Chin  liad  dropped  the  state  sacrifices  ol*  tlie  Ihia. 
W hen  the  marquis  of  Chin  was  laid  up  with  sickness,  he  took  the 
advice  of  Tse  Clian  of  CMny  and  instituted  the  ILsia  sacrifices, 
whereupon  lie  recovered  irom  his  disease.6  Had  in  fact  the  raio 
sacrifices  not  been  in  order,  or  the  dragon  neglected,  the  same  mis- 
fortune would  have  befallen  Clan  again.  Provided  tlie  drought  w  an 
attracted  by  the  administration,  the  latter  sliould  have  been  re- 
organised, but  wliat  would  be  \hc.  use  of  making  provisions  lor 
the  rain  sacrifices  or  the  drag(»n,  if  the  admiuistration  was  defective? 

Knng  Yang  in  his  commentary  on  the  Cfi  un-cltiu  says  that 
during  the  time  of  extraordinary  heat,  it  suffices  to  reform  tl"， 
government,  when  the  Yin  and  the  Yang  fluids  mix,  and  <liyness 
and  moisture  unite;  bucIi  being  tlie  law  of  nature.  W lierel'ore  must 
the  rain  sacrifices  still  he  prepared  then,  and  tlie  dragons  be  put 
up?  Do  the  spirits  delight  in  these  offerings?  II',  when  the  rain 
comes,  the  broiling  heat  did  nut  relax,  nor  tlie  disiistrous  drought 
cease,  where  would  be  the  effect  of  the  changes  and  reforms? 

Moreover  heat  and  cold  are  the  sam"  a«  dryness  and  moisture: 
all  are  the  results  of  government,  and  man  is  responsible  for  tlu'in. 
It  is  difficult  t)i  ere  fore  to  see  the  reaaon,  why  in  time  of  drouglit 
people  pray  for  liappiness,  but  not  in  cold  or  hot  weather.  In  case 


' Htin-t/U.   The  work  still  exists. 

， Lu  Chia  lived  in  the  2nd  cent.  b.c.  at  ttie  beginning  of  tlie  Han  dynasty. 
Twice  he  was  sent  as  envoy  to  tlie  southern 】 Wi.    Cf.  I,  p.  304. 

s  Am  author  of  the  2nd  cent.  u.c.  He  wrote  the  Ch  im-ch ht-/an-lu,  tlie  "  Rich 
Dew  of  the  Spring  and  Autumn,'*  which  has  come  down  to  ua. 

*  Cf.  p.  206. 

•  Cf.  p.  214. 

I'un '  Heng.  30 


Digitized  by  Google 


4G6 


Lmi-Hfng:  E.  Critique. 


that  there  is  a  retribution,  wo  ought  to  have  recourse  to  the  rain 
sacrifices  and  to  tli,'  dragon  for  heat  and  cold  as  well.  Men  of 
superior  intollcct  and  great  knowledge,  however,  do  not  bolievi-  in 
either  of  these  theories. 


Tung  Chung  Shu  does  not  call  himself  a  scholar  in  his  books, 
probably  thinking  that  he  surpassed  all  i\w  otl"'rs.  Among  the 
prolifn*  writers  of  the  Han  time  ！ Sse  Ma  Ch' irn  and  Yang  Tae  YUu  1 
ar«*  the  Yellow  River  and  the  /,〃",2  all  the  rest  like  tlie  Cliiny  and 
Wei 3  rivers.  Yot  Sse  Ma  Ch'ien  giv'a  us  too  little  of  his  own  jmlg- 
mcnt,  Yang  Tse  YUn  does  not  speak  on  common  topics,  and  Tnttg 
Chung  Sfm's  discussions  on  tlie  Taoist  doctrines  are  very  strange. 
Tlicse  are  the  three  most  famous  mvn  of  the  north. 

Tlie  Chan-sftu 4  states  tlmt  'lung  Chung  Shu  disturbed  their  books, 
which  means  the  sayings  of  Confitc'ms.  The  readers  citlier  hold 
that  "  to  disturb  our  books  "  means  that  ho  throws  the  works  of 
( 'oiifitt-uii  into  disorder,  or  thoy  suppose  that  44  liuin  "  is  equivalent 
(o  "  adjust,"  and  that  he  adjusts  the  writings  of  G)nfitdus.  In  botli 
cast's  it  is  tlie  same  word  "  I  nan"  but  betweeu  order  and  disorder 
there  is  a  great  distance.  Yet  tlie  readers  do  not  equally  apply 
their  minds,  nor  thoroughly  study  the  questiou,  h»*nco  their  wrong 
statcnii'Qts.  To  say  tliat  Tuny  Chung  Shu  carried  disorder  into  the 
writings  of  (:""fm:""、  would  imply  an  extraordinary  talent,  ami  to 
say  that  he  adjusted  these  writings,  would  likewise  imply  a  wonder- 
ful knowledge.  Nobody  ever  said  of  Ma  ('It  or  Yang  Tse  Yiin 
that  they  belonged  to  the  school  of  tlie  Sage  or  not,  or  that  they 
disturbed  or  adjusted  the  works  of  ( onfucius.  Most  people  mnv-a- 
(lays  do  not  thiuk  enough  and,  wlieu  treating  a  problem,  lose  sight 
of  tlie  principal  facts.  Tlierefore  we  liave  these  two  doubtful  views, 
between  which  tlie  scholars  are  vacillating. 

The  work  of  Tuny  Chung  Shu  is  not  antagonistic  to  the  Con- 
fucian school,  neither  does  it  equal  the  writing  of  Confucius.  Tlie  re- 
fore  the  statement  tliat  it  invalidates  tliose  writings  is  preposterous. 
On  the  other  hand  tlie  writings  of  i '("if ，u:ius  are  not  in  confusion, 
consequently  the  assortion  that  it  brings  tliesi*  writings  into  good 
order  is  wrong  likewise. 

1  The  philosopher  Yang  fLiuny.    Cf.  p.  124. 
3  The  largest  affluent  of  the  YangUe. 

3  Both  trihiitArie.s  of  the  Yellow  River  in  Kan-fit  and  Shensi,  which  joined 
together,  fall  into  the  Huang  Ho  near  its  elbow  In  Sfiensi. 
«  V"f.  v.  319. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Books.  407 

Confucius  said,1  44  When  the  music-master  Chih 2  began  and 
then  came  the  finish  (luan)3  of  the  h'uan-cha,*  how  liiaguificent  it 
was  and  how  it  filled  the  ears! " 

The  finish  (luan)  in  our  case  refers  to  the  sayings  of  Con- 
fucius. Confucius  lived  under  the  Chou  and  】ai(l  the  foundation  (of 
the  Confucian  doctrine)  ；  Tung  Chung  Shu  under  the  Hon  finished 
it,  in  so  far  as  it  was  not  yet  complete,  and  Sh'e  Ma  Ch  icn  sup- 
plemented it  here  and  there.  That  is  the  idea.  In  the  collections 
of  irregular  verse  and  dithyrambs5  every  song  lias  a  refrain  (luan), 
which  amounts  to  the  same.  Since  it  was  Timg  Chuwj  S/tu  who 
gave  the  last  touch  to  the  Analects  of  Con/uciiis,  we  should  not  bf 
surprised  that  his  remarks  on  the  offering  of  the  rain  sacrifice  and 
the  use  of  dragons  have  some  meaning. 


Yen  Yuan  said,  "  Wliat  man  is  S/tun,  and  wlio  am  I  ?  ，， a ― 
Among  the  Five  Emperors  and  Three  Rulers  Shun  was  his  only 
ideal.  He  knew  that  he  was  pursuing  the  same  goal.  The  ideals 
of  the  wise  aud  virtuous  and  the  aims  of  the  silent  scholar  are  in 
fact  identical. 

What  Tunrf  Chung  Shu  says  about  morals,  virtue,  and  govern- 
ment deserves  the  highest  praise,  but  as  regards  researches  into 
every  day  life  and  discussions  of  the  most  comftion  errors,  lluan 
Chin  Slum 7  stands  unrivalled.  Tung  Chung  Shu's  writings  may  be 
equalled,  but  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  challenge  Huan  Chan  Sim". 

A  Bayardo  has  his  special  features  distinguishing  him  from 
other  horses,  or  is  a  noble  steed  with  a  peculiar  gait.  There  may 
be  horses  capable  of  running  a  thousand  li，  they  will  never  l)e 
called  Bayard 08,  because  the  colour  of  their  hair  diil'ers  from  that 
of  Bayardo.  There  may  be  men  whose  writings  could  be  com- 
pared with  those  of  Tung  Chung  Shu,  or  whose  essays  would  rank 
close  ofter  those  of  Huan  Chiln  Shan、  yet  they  would  not  be  like 

1  Analects  VIII,  15. 

， 3L- 

*  The  music-mastor  of  Lu. 

*  The  first  Ode  of  the  Shiking. 

*  Cf.  the  great  number  of  such  collections  enumerated  in  the  Catalogue  of 
the  Han-shu,  chap.  30. 

6  Quotation  from  Mendun  III,  Pt.  1, 1  {Lfgye  Vol.  II,  p.  lid). 

7  Huan  Chun  Shan  二  Huan  Tan,  a  great  scholar  of  the  1st  cent.  n.c.  and  a.d. 
People  admired  his  large  library.  He  incurred  the  displeasure  of  Kuang  \\  u  Ti,  whom 
he  rebuked  for  his  belief  in  books  of  fate,  and  was  sentenced  to  banisliincnt. 


Digitized  by  Google 


468 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


the  two  scholars,  their  names  would  always  be  different.  A  horse 
might  learn  to  make  a  thousand  li,  it  would  not  become  a  Bayarclo 
or  a  Bucephalus  thereby,  and  a  man  might  aspire  to  sageliood  and 
knowledge,  he  would  not  become  a  Con/ttcius  or  a  Mi  T%  for  the 
following  reason : 

It  is  very  difficult  to  equal  Uuan  C/ifin  Shan's  writings.  When 
two  blades  cut  one  another,  we  s<ie,  which  is  sharp  and  which 
blunt,  and,  when  two  treatises  are  compared  together,  one  finds 
out,  which  of  the  two  is  right  and  which  wrong.  This  is  the  case 
of  the  "Four  Difficulties  "  1  by  Iliu  Fei  '/:"，，  the  treatise  on  '*  Salt 
and  Iron  "  -  by  Htum  A"""",3  and  the  "  New  Reflections  "4  by  Ihtan 
CMn  S/tan. 

The  statrinents  of  tl"，  pcoplo  are  often  douhtful  and  untrue, 
yet  some  mistaken  critics  regard  thpm  as  true,  wliicli  leads  to 
great  dilemmas.  If  a  juilgr  deciding  a  case  has  his  doubts  about 
it,  so  that  thougli  giving  liis  judgment  lir  would  hesitate  to  iuflict 
a  punislimeut,  truth  ami  untruth  would  not  be  determined,  and 
right  and  wrong  not  established.  Then  people  would  be  entitled 
to  say  tliat  (he  talents-  of  the  judge  wen*  not  sufficieut  for  his 
post.  If  in  ventilating  a  question  <»ne  does  not  do  it  thoroughly, 
merely  noting  two  douhtful  opinions  and  transmitting  them  both, 
one  does  not  Jo  mucli  to  settle  the  question.  Would  it  not  be 
better  then  to  break  through  the  coiifusion  and  cut  the  Gonlian 
knot,  lor  words  must  be  iutflligible,  and  expressions  convey  a 
meaning? 

Confucim  wrote  the  Ch  un-ch' in  in  such  a  way  that  lie  recom- 
mended tlie  slightest  guo(l  tlnn«j  and  blamed  the  smallest  evil. 
Wlu'novtT  th«Te  was  anything  praiseworthy,  his  words  servt'd  to 
set  forth  its  oxcellenco,  and  wlieiu'ver  there  was  anything  open  to 
blame,  he  poiutrd  out  its  badness  witli  a  view  to  stigmatise  the 
action.  Tlx*  "  New  Reflections "  fall  in  with  the  C/i'nn-ch  m  in 
this  respect.  Hut  tlie  public  prizes  antiquity,  and  does  not  think 
much  of  our  own  times.  Tlu*y  fancy  that  the  modern  literature 
falls  short  of  tlie  <>I«1  writings.  However,  ancient  and  modern 
times  are  the  same.  Tlie  re  aro  men  of  groat  and  of  small  talents, 
and  tliere  is  truth  and  lalseliood.  If  im*spective  of  the  intrinsic 
value  they  only  t'stt'Pin  wliat  is  old,  tliis  would  imply  that  the 
ancients  excelled  our  moderus.  Yet  men  like  Tsou  Pu  Ch i  of  Tung- 

1  Four  chapters  of  //""  Fei  T、r '-、  work,  forming  chap.  15  and  1G,  Nos.  36-39. 

9  Yen-t'ieU-lun,  a  treatise  on  questions  <»f  national  cootiomy. 

， Huan  Kuan,  also  called  ( 'hnt  Shan  T«e,  lived  in  the  1st  cent.  b.c. 

*  Hsin-lun. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Critical  Remarks  on  Various  Books. 


fan,  Yuan  T'ai  Po  and  Yitan  Whi  Shu  of  Lin-htai, 1  Wu  (Mn  Kao 
and  CUou  ('Kang  S/tMff  of  K(uel~chi,  though  they  nrvor  attained  tlic 
dignity  of  state- mi nistors,  wore  all  men  of  stupoiulous  erudition  and 
abilities  and  the  most  elegant  and  dashing  knights  of  the  pen.3 

The  Yuan-sse  of  Tsou  Po  Ch'i,  tho  Yi-cltaug-rhil  of  Ywm  T'ai  Po, 
the  Ihien-ming  of  Yuan  Wen  Sliu、  the  Yileh-yo  of  Wu  Chiln  Kao,  and 
the  Tung-li  of  C/ion  Ch  ang  ShMg  could  not  be  surpassed  by  Liu 
Tse  Citing  or  Yang  Tse  Y(ln.  Men  of  genius  may  be  mure  or  less 
gifted,  but  there  art'  no  ancients  or  moderns;  their  works  may  be 
right  or  wrong,  but  there  are  no  old  or  new  ones.  Although  no 
special  works  have  been  written  by  men  like  Ch'M  Tse  Hui  of 
Kuang-litig^  Yen  Fang,  Pan  A'»/,s  at  present  clerk  of  a  board,  tho 
officer  of  the  censorate,  Yang  Chung,  and  Chuan  }7,  thoir  vorsos  and 
tlioir  memorials  are  written  in  the  most  fascinating;  and  brilliant 
style.  Their  poetry  resembles  that  of  C)i H  Yuan n  ami  Chi"?  thoir 
nu'niorials  those  of  T  ang  Lin  and  Au  Yung.*  Placed  side  by  side, 
the  beauty  of  their  compositions  proved  to  be  tin*  same.  At  present 
they  are  not  yet  illustrious,  but  after  a  liundml  generations  they 
will  be  on  a  par  with  Liu  Tse  ( 'heny "  and  Yang  Tse  Yi'in. 10 

Li  Ssf  freely  culled  from  tho  works  of  /Ian  Fei  Tse,  and  Hou 
P  u  Tse  did  much  to  divulge  tin*  T  ai-hsilnn-cliing  of  Yang  Tse  Yi'tn. 
Han  Fei  Tse  and  Li  belonged  to  tl"、  same  school,  and  Yang  Tse 
Yun  and  Hon  /yu  Tse  lived  at  the  same  court."  They  had  an  eye 
for  what  was  remarkable'  and  useful,  and  wore  not  iniluenced  in 
their  opinions  and  judgments  by  considerations  of  time.  Searching 
truth  and  seeking  whatever  was  good,  they  made  it  their  principle 
not  to  look  too  iar  for  it,  and  not  to  despise  tliose  with  whom 

I  A  region  in  Anhui. 
3  A  city  in  Chfkiang. 

3  Nothing  is  known  of  these  authors  or  their  writings.  The  cyclopedias  do 
not  even  mention  their  names. 

4  A  place  in  Kiung»u. 

II  The  historian  Pan  Am,  author  of  the  llun-shu  "  History  of  the  Former 
Han  Dynasty,''  who  died  92  A.n. 

n  Who  wrote  the  famous  poem  Li-mo  cf.  p.  11:;. 
7  Chia  Yu. 

R  An  Yung  lived  ia  the  1st  cent.  ".<'.  As  censor  lie  remonstrated  against 
tlio  abases  of  tlic  court,  and  presented  over  forty  ineinorials  upon  divine  portents. 

0  Lin  Tse  ( %vff  --  Liu  Hitiang,  ,H»>  ;»  „.r.,  i.s  a  celebrated  writer  of  the  Han 
time,  who  did  much  for  the  preservation  of  ancient  literature.  Besides  he  wrote 
works  on  government  und  poetry. 

,(>  Wttng  ('hung't  prediction  has  not  proved  true.  The  authors  of  his  time, 
whom  he  praises  .so  mucli,  arc  all  forgotten,  Pun  Ku  alone  exrepted. 

" At  tlie  court  of  the  Emperor  Ch'rny  7V  ：52-7  h.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


170  Lnn-Heng:  E.  Critique. 

they  were  working  shoulder  to  shoulder.  They  had  a  great  par- 
tiality for  ewryfhing  uncommon,  and  quite  uncommon  was  the 
fame  which  tlicy  won  thereby.  Yang  Tse  Yiln  revised  the  Li-mo. 
He  could  not  completely  change  a  whole  chapter,  but  whenever  he 
louud  anything  wrong,  lie  altered  it.  Though  it  be  impossible  to 
read  all  the  tliirtecn  thousand  chapters  contained  in  tho  list  of  the 
Six  Departments  of  Literature,1  one  may  know  at  least  their  pur- 
port and  take  up  for  discussion  some  of  those  passages  wliicli  give 
no  proper  sense. 


1  In  the  Catalogue  of  Literntare,  fomiing  chapter  HO  of  the  Ilan-shu,  lAu  //«•" 
divided  the  tlicu  existing  body  of  literature  under  7  heads :  Classics,  works  on  the 
six  arts,  philosophy,  poetry,  military  science,  divination,  and  mediciiie.  Owing  to  the 
decline  of  the  healing  art  under  the  Han  dynasty,  the  last  division  was  dropped,  and 
n»  titles  of*  medical  books  arc  given.  Tliere  remained  hut  the  six  divbious,  mentioned 
in  the  text.  Under  tliese  divisions  were  comprised  38  subdivisions  with  5%  authors, 
whose  names  and  works  are  given  in  the  Catalogue.  Tlieir  writings  contain 
13,209  chapters  or  books. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Kcjiiality  of  the  Age«. 


471 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 
The  Equality  of  the  Ages  {ChH-shih). 

There  is  a  saying  that  in  ancient  times  people  were  tall, 
good-looking,  and  strong,  and  lived  to  become  about  a  hundred 
years  old,  whereas  iu  modern  times  they  are  short,  ugly,  cut  off 
in  their  prime,  and  short-lived.  The  following  cause  is  given: ― lu 
ancient  times  the  harmonious  fluid  was  in  abundance.  People 
married  at  the  proper  time.  At  their  birth  they  received  this 
good  fluid,  and  therefore  suffered  no  injuries  afterwards.  Their 
houes  and  joints  being  strong  and  solid,  they  grew  tall,  and  reached 
a  higb  age,  and  their  outward  appearance  was  beautiful.  In  later 
generations  all  this  was  reversed,  therefore  they  were  small,  died 
young,  and  looked  nasty. 

This  statement  is  preposterous.  In  olden  days  the  rulers 
were  sages,  aod  so  tliey  are  in  modern  times.  The  virtue  of  the 
sages  then  and  now  does  not  difler,  therefore  their  government  in 
ancient  and  modem  times  cannot  be  different.  The  Heaven  of 
antiquity  is  the  Heaven  of  later  ages.  Heaven  does  not  change, 
and  its  fluid  has  not  been  altered.  The  people  of  former  ages 
are  the  same  as  those  of  modern  times.  They  all  are  filled  with 
the  original  fluid.  Tliis  fluid  is  genuine  and  】iarmonious  now 
well  as  in  days  of  yore,  why  then  should  tlieir  bodies,  whicli  are 
made  of  it,  not  be  the  same?  Being  imbued  with  the  same  fluid, 
they  have  the  same  nature,  and  their  nature  being  the  same,  their 
physical  frames  must  be  alike.  Their  physical  frames  being  alike, 
their  outward  appearance  must  be  similar,  and  this  being  the  case, 
their  length  of  life  cannot  but  be  equal.  One  Heaven  and  one 
Earth  conjointly  produce  all  beings.  When  they  are  created,  they 
all  receive  the  same  fluid.  Its  scarcity  and  abundance  varies  in 
all  ages  equally.  P^nperors  and  kings  rei^n  over  successive  gener- 
ations, and  all  the  different  ages  have  the  samo  principles.  Peoj)le 
marry  at  the  same  time  and  with  similar  ceremonies,  for  although 


Digitized  by  Google 


472 


Lun-Hpng:  E.  Critique. 


it  has  been  recorded  that  men  married  at  tlie  age  of  thirty,  aud 
women  at  that  of  twenty,  and  though  there  lias  been  such  a  rule 
for  marriages,1  it  is  not  certain  that  it  really  lias  been  observed. 
We  can  infer  this  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  observed  now  either. 
The  rules  for  ceremonies  and  music  have  been  preserved  up  to 
our  days,  but  are  the  people  of  to-day  willing  to  comply  with 
them.'  Since  they  do  not  like  to  practise  them,  people  of  old 
have  not  done  so  either.  From  the  people  of  to-day  wc  learn  to 
know  the  people  of  old. 

Creatures  are  creatures.  Man  can  live  up  to  one  hundred 
years,  but  very  often  we  see  l?oys  avIio  only  reach  the  age  of  ten 
years.  The  lives  of  the  creatures  living  on  earth  and  their  trans- 
formations at  the  utmost  last  one  hundred  years.  When  they 
approach  this  period,  tliey  die,  which  can  always  be  observed. 
Between  all  these  creatures  and  tliose  wlio  do  not  become  older 
them  ten  years  is  no  fundamental  diirerence.  If  people  of  ancient 
and  modern  times  do  not  diirer,  it  must  be  possible  to  predetermine 
the  length  of  their  lives  within  the  limit  of  one  liundred  years  by 
means  of  (Hviiiiition. 

In  the  height  of  tlie  domestic  animals,  the  size  of  the  various 
kinds  of  grain,  the,  reptiles,  plants,  trees,  metals,  stones,  pearls,  and 
jowols  as  well  as  in  the  creeping,  wriggling,  crawling,  and  panting 
<if  the  various  animals  there  is  no  diflerence,  which  means  that 
their  shapos  is  identical.  The  water  and  the  fire  in  olden  days  are 
the  present  water  and  fire.  Now,  the  fluid  changes  into  water 
or  fire.  Provided  that  there  \w  a  diflerencc  in  the  fluids,  was  the 
water  pellucid,  and  tlit*  fire  hot  formerly,  and  is  now  the  water 
opaquo,  and  the  fire,  cold  ？ 

^lan  grows  six  to  seven  feet  high,  measures  three  to  four 
spans  in  circumference,  liis  face  has  five  colours,2  and  his  greatest 
ag<*  is  one  hundred  years.  During  thousamls  and  thousands  of 
gciuTations  there  is  no  change.  \a*\  us  suppose  that  in  ancient 
times  men  were  tall,  goo(l-lool《in'g，  strong,  and  long-lived,  and  that 
in  later  generations  all  this  was  reversed.  Then,  when  Heaven 
and  Karth  wt'r"  first  established,  and  the  first  men  were  created, 
could  they  bo  as  tall  as  the  Prince  of  Vang-f^ng^  as  handsome  as 


•  This  seems  to  have  heen  the  rule  under  the  i  'hou  dynasty.  Cf.  Liki,  JVV/- 
Utr  Sect.  II  Sf„r^l  Boo"  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  47-S). 

a  The  coinplexiori  is  yellowish,  the  lips  are  red,  the  teeth  white,  the  hair 
black,  and  the  \  !、i,is  are  bluish. 

3  Cf.  p.  48(5. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Kquality  of  the  Ages. 


473 


Prince  Chao  of  Sung,y  and  as  long-lived  as  Peng  Tsu? 2  And  after 
thousand  generations  hence,  will  they  be  as  small  as  flower-seeds, 
as  ill-favoured  as  -、 f"  3/m,8  and  as  short-lived  as  an  ephemeral  11  v? 

Under  the  reign  of  Wang  Marig*  there  was  a  giant  ten  feet 
high,  called  Pa  Ch'u,  and  during  the  Chien-wu 5  period  Chany  ('hung 
Shih  in  Ying-cfi  unn6  measured  ten  feet,  two  inclies,  and  Chang  Tang 
over  eight  feet,  whereas  his  father  was  not  quite  five  feet  high. 
They  all  belong  to  tlie  present  generation,  and  were  either  tall  or 
small.  The  assertion  of  the  Literati  is  wrong  therefore  and  a 
mistake. 

They  say  that  in  times  of  yore  people  were  employed,  as 
befitted  them.  Hunchbacks  were  used  as  gate-keepers,  and  dwarfs 
as  actors.  But,  if  all  were  tall  and  good-looking,  where  did  the 
hunchbacks  and  the  dwarfs  come  from  ？ 

It  is  further  alleged  that  tlie  natures  of  the  peo]>le  of  the 
past  were  honest  and  easily  reformed,  whereas  tlie  culture  of  later 
ages  is  superficial,  so  that  they  are  difficult  to  be  governed.  Thus 
the  Yiking  says  that  in  the  remote  past,  cords  were  knotted  as  a 
means  of  governing  the  people,  which  knots  in  later  ages  were  re- 
placed by  books.7  First  knots  were  used,  because  reforms  were 
easy,  the  books  afterwards  prove  the  difficulty  of  government.  Prior 
to  Fu  IIsi,s  the  characters  of  the  people  were  of  the  plainest 
kind: -- Tliey  lay  down  self-satisHed,  and  sat  up  perfectly  pleased. 
'Fhey  congregated,  and  flocked  together,  and  knew  their  mothers, 
but  nnt  their  fathers.9  At  Fu  list's  time  people  had  attained  such 
a  degree  of  refinement,  that  tlie  shrewd  attempted  to  deceive  the 
simple-minded,  the  courageous  would  frighten  the  timid,  tlie 
strong  insult  tlie  weak,  aud  the  many  oppress  the  few.  There- 
fore Fu  I  hi  invented  the  eight  <liagrains  for  the  purpose  of  re- 
straining them.    At  the  Clio"  epoch,  tlio  state  of  the  people  had 


' A  contemporary  of  Confuciun,  famous  for  his  beauty  (cf.  AtmUctM  VI,  14), 
but  of  a  character.    He  committed  incest  with  his  half-sister  Nan  T«e,  the 

wife  of  Dakc  Ling  of  Wei. 

9  The  Chinese  Methusaleh. 

3  The  fourth  wife  of  Huang  TV,  an  intelligent,  but  very  ill-favoured  woman. 

*  9-23  a.d. 

h  25-56  a.d. 

*  A  circuit  in  Anhui. 

7  Yiking,  Chi-t'sf  II  {Lrgge's  translation  p.  38f>). 

8  The  most  ancient  mythical  emperor. 

9  Does  that  mean  that  the  pre-historic  Chinese  lived  in  a  state  of  matriarchate 
or  in  polyandry  like  the  Tibetans?  We  find  llie  same  notice  in  Chunng  T»e  chap. 20, 
p.  22  v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


47 


Lun-Ueiig:  E.  Critique. 


become  very  de^onerate,  and  it  was  difficult  to  raise  tlie  eight 
diagrams  to  their  former  importance.  Therefore  King  Wen  increased 
their  number  to  sixty-four.  The  changes  wore  the  principal  thing, 
and  the  people  were  not  allowed  to  flag.  W hen,  during  the  ( hou 
epoch,  tliey  had  been  down  for  a  long  while,  (hnfwi,"  wrote  the 
" Spring  and  Autumn,"  ,'xtolling  the  smallest  good,  aud  criticiziu^ 
the  slightest  wrong.  He  also  said,  "  l'h'm、  liad  the  advantage  of 
viewing  the  two  past  dynasties.  How  complete  and  elegant  are 
its  regulations.  I  follow  Cho"."1  Confuc'ms  knowing  that  the  a^e 
was  steq)ed  in  sin,  ill-bred,  and  hard  to  govern,  made  the  strictest 
rules,  and  took  the  minutest  preventive  measures  to  repress  the 
(lisrp«pectful,  and  everything  was  done  in  the  way  of  restrictions. 

This  is  absurd.  Of  ul(l、  people  were  imbued  with  the  Five 
Virtues,  and  later  gnuTations  were  so  likewise.  They  all  h;ul  the 
primriplr  of  the  Five  Virtues  in  their  hearts,  and  at  birth  were 
endoweil  witli  tl"，  same  fluid.  Why  shall  the  natures  of  the 
former  have  been  plain  and  honest,  and  the  latter  unmaunerly 
The  opponents  liave  noted  that  iu  olden  times  people  drank  blood, 
and  ate  herbs,  they  had  no  grain  for  food.  In  later  ages  tliey 
dug  up  the  earth  for  wells,  tilled  tlie  ground,  and  sowed  grain. 
Tliey  drauk  from  the  wt'lls,  and  ate  grain,  whicli  they  had  [> re- 
pared  with  water  and  fire.  Tlu'y  also  note  that  in  remote  anti- 
quity people  were  living  high  up  iu  caverns,  and  wrapt  themselves 
i"  skins  of  wild  beasts  and  birds.  Later  generations  changed  the 
caverns  into  houses  and  pal;iccs.  and  bedecked  themselves  witli 
cloth  and  silk  fabrics.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  they  regard  tlie 
natures  of  the  fornior  as  plain  and  l">r"»st，  and  tlie  later  as  ill-bred. 
The  tools  and  the  methods  have  undergone  a  change,  but  nature 
and  its  manifestations  have  continued  the  same.  In  spite  of  that, 
they  speak  of  plainness  of  nature  and  the  poorness  of  culture. 

In  every  age  prosperity  alternates  with  decay,  and,  when  the 
latter  has  gone  on  for  a  long  time,  it  begets  vices.  That  is  what 
happens  with  raiment  and  food  used  by  man.  When  a  garment 
has  just  boen  made,  it  is  fresh  anil  intact,  and  food  just  cooked 
is  clean  and  smells  good.  After  a  while,  the  garment  becomes 
worn  out,  and  after  some  days,  the  food  begins  to  smell  bad. 
The  laws  by  w  hich  nature  and  culture  were  governed  in  the  past 
and  at  the  present,  are  the  same.  There  is  nature,  and  there  is 
culture,  sometimes  there  is  prosperity,  and  sometimes  decay.  So 
it  has  been  of  yore,  not  only  now.    How  shall  we  prove  tliat? 

1  The  ( 'hou  dynasty. 

2  Anaicts  HI,  14. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Ei|tiality  of  the  Ages. 


175 


It  has  been  put  on  remrd  that  the  kings  of  the  house  of 
1  taught  faithfulness.  Tlie  sovereign  teacl)iu^  faithfulness,  good 
men  were  faithful,  but,  wlu-n  the  decline  sot  in,  common  people 
became  ruilo.  To  combat  rudeness  nothing  is  better  tlmn  polite- 
ness. Therefore  the  kings  of  the  17"  dynasty  -  taught  politeness. 
The  sovereign  inculcating  politeness,  good  mon  were  polite,  but 
whon  the  decline  began,  roramon  people  became  rogues.  To  repress 
roguish ness  nothiug  is  better  than  education.  Therefore  the  kings 
of  C/imt3  taught  scifnee.  The  sovereign  teaching  science,  good  men 
were  scholarly,  but  then  came  the  decline,  and  common  pooplc 
became  narrow-minded.  The  best  antidote  against  narrow-minded- 
ness is  fait)ifulness.  therefore  the  rulers  succptMling  I  lie  Clum  dynasty 
ought  to  have  recourse  to  faitlifulness.  The  relonns  of  Yd  con- 
tinui'd  by  tlie  Ihia  dyntusty,  w^w  labouring  under  narrow-minded- 
ness, therefore  it  inculcati'd  laitliiulncss.  Since  Yd  based  liis  re- 
forms on  science,  niguislmess  must  have  l>e»'n  the  defect  of  the  people 
uii(]er  his  predecessors.  Our  contemporaries  viewing  the  narrow- 
mindedness  of  our  present  culture,  despise  and  condeiiin  it,  and 
therefore  tliey  say  that  in  old  times  the  natures  of  people  were 
plain  and  honest,  whereas  tlie  culture  of  later  ages  is  narrow- 
minded.  Ln  the  same  manner,  when  the  members  of  one  family 
are  not  zealous,  people  will  say  that  tlie  members  of  other  families 
are  diligent  and  honest.4 

It  has  been  asserted  that  the  ancients  set  high  store  in 
rightcousiK'ss,  and  sliglite'l  their  bodies.  When  an  event  liappcMied 
that  appealed  to  their  sense  of  loyalty  and  justice,  so  that  tliey 
felt  it  their  duty  to  suflfcr  deatli,  thvy  would  jump  into  boiling 
water,  or  rush  into  the  points  of  s\vor<ls,  and  die  without  lament. 
Such  was  the  devotion  of  Hung  Yen,h  and  the  honesty  of  Pu  ( 'han 
of  (.'h' hi,  who  acted  like  this.  .Similar  instances  have  been  re- 
corded in  books.  The  cases  of  voluntary  draths.  and  soil- sacrifices 
are  very  itumcrous,  and  not  scarce.  Tin'  people  now-a-days,  tliey 
believe,  are  struggling  lor  gain  only,  and  loading  a  wild  life.  Thry 
liave  discarded  justice,  and  are  not  scrupulous  as  to  the  means 

1  2205-1 7G6  b.c. 
， 1766-1122  b.c 

*  1122-249  b.c. 

*  People  like  to  contrast,  even  though  there  be  little  diflerence  between  the 
things  thos  contrasted. 

4  A  faithful  minister  of  Duke  /  of  Wei.    Cf.  p.  UH5. 

*  Wlicii  in  :">4i)  b.c.  Chuang,  Duke  of  (，h'i、  was  murdered,  Pu  Chan  drove  to 
his  palace  and  on  hearing  the  affray,  died  of  fright. 


Digitized  by  Google 


•17(; 


Lan-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


they  employ  in  obtaining  their  ends.  They  do  not  restrain  one 
another  by  righteousness,  or  vie  in  doing  good.  The  disregard 
of  justice  they  do  not  consider  a  source  of  danger,  nor  are  they 
afraid  of  tho  conscqiHMiccs  of  their  wrong  doing. 

This  is  nonsense.  Tlie  horoes  of  ancient  times  are  the  licroes 
of  the  present  age.  Their  hearts  are  equally  sensible  to  benevolence 
and  justice,  and  in  case  of  any  emergency  they  will  bi*  roused. 
In  the  past,  there  have  been  unprincipled  characters,  and  at  present 
there  are  persons  with  the  keenest  sense  of  honour.  Goodness 
and  badness  are  mixed,  why  should  one  age  be  devoid  of  either? 
The  story-tellers  like  to  extol  the  past,  and  disparage  the  present 
time.  They  make  mucli  of  what  they  know  by  hearsay,  and 
despise  wliat  tliey  see  with  their  own  eyes.  The  disputants  will 
discourse  on  what  is  long  ago,  and  tho  literati  write  on  wliat  is 
far  away.  The  curious  things  near  at  hand,  the  speakers  do  not 
mention,  and  the  extraordinary  events  of  our  own  time  are  not 
committed  to  writing. 

When  during  a  famine  starved  people  were  going  to  eat  the 
«'lder  brother  of  Tse  Ming^  a  young  man  of  Lang-yeh,x  he  bound 
and  prostrated  himself,  and  asked  to  be  eaten  in  lieu  of  his  brother. 
The  liungry  people  so  much  admired  liis  genorosity,  that  tliey  set 
tlu-in  both  fr«','，  and  did  not  oat  them.  After  the  eldrr  brother 
liad  died,  1"'  took  his  orphan  hoii,  and  brought  him  up,  and  loved 
him  as  mucli  as  his  own  son.  At  a  time  of  scarcity,  wlien  no 
grain  was  left,  so  that  botlj  boys  <-ould  not  be  kept  alive,  be 
killed  his  own  son  by  starvation,  and  preserved  the  life  of  tho 
son  of  liis  elder  brother.  Hail  Shu  of  Lm-htiai^  also  brought  up 
the  orphan  son  of  his  elder  brother,  and  at  a  time  of  dearth  al- 
lowed his  own  son  to  die  of  hunger  in  order  to  keep  his  brother's 
son  alive.    His  magnanimity  was  like  that  of  Tse  Ming. 

The  father  of  Mhig  Chang  in  Kr tiei-chi^  Yiug,  was  judicial  secret- 
ary of  the  prefet-ture.  Whon  the  general  of  the  prefecture  liad 
beaten  an  innocent  man  to  death,  and  tlie  case  came  up  for  re- 
vision, Yiny  took  the  guilt  upon  hiinself,  oflfrred  himself  for  puuish- 
ment,  and  at  last  suflered  deatli  for  the  general.  Meng  Chang  later 
on  l)ecame  civil  secri'tary  of  a  prefect ure.  He  took  part  in  a  camp- 
aign against  insurgents,  but  the  soldiers  were  routed,  and  shot  l>y 
tho  rebels.  Thereupon  he  took  tlie  place  of  thr  commander,  which 
1"'  did  not  leave,  until  he  was  killed.    Is  tliere  any  difrerence  from 

1  A  place  in  Shantung. 

2  A  circuit  in  /in Aim  province. 
1   A  city  in  Chckiuny. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Ecjuality  of  the  Ages. 


477 


the  faithfulness  of  Hung  Yen  or  the  righteousness  of  Pu  Chan  of 
CK in"}  But  would  the  writers  of  our  own  time  deign  to  use  these 
cases  as  examples?  For  illustrations  in  proof  of  their  views  they 
go  up  to  Ya  and  the  HsUt  period,  and  down  as  far  as  the  Yin  and 
Clwu  dynasties.  The  exploits  and  remarkable  feats  of  the  Cliin 
and  Han  epoch  are  already  too  modern  for  them,  and  fancy  our 
own  time,  which  comes  after  all  the  other  ages,  and  what  the  nar- 
rators have  seen  with  their  own  eyesl  The  painters  like  to  paint 
men  of  anciont  dynasties,  and  reject  heroes  of  the  Ch  in  and  Han 
epoch,  however  wonderful  tlieir  deeds  may  have  been.  The  scho- 
lars ot*  the  present  age  prize  antiquity,  and  scorn  the  present.  They 
valup  the  suovv-goose  and  disdain  the  fowl,  because  tlic  snow-goose 
is  from  afar,  and  tbe  fowl  is  nt'ar. 

Provided  that  there  wcro  a  moralist  now  more  profound  than 
eitlier  Confucius  or  7t,  yet  his  name  would  not  rank  as  liigh 
as  theirs,  and,  if  in  his  conduct  he  should  surpass  even  Tuing  Tse 
and  Yen  //'"•，  he  would  not  be  as  famoUH  as  they.  Wliy?  Because 
tlic  masses  think  nothing  of  what  thoy  see,  but  esteem  what  they 
know  only  by  hearsay.  Should  there  be  a  man  now,  just  and 
generous  to  the  high<'st  degree,  and  should  an  iiujuiry  into  his 
actions  prove  that  he  is  not  outvied  by  anybody  in  the  past,  would 
the  writers  mention  him  in  their  works,  sliowing  tliat  they  give 
liira  credit  for  wliat  be  lias  (loi"，?  Narrating  marvellous  stories, 
they  would  not  wrong  the  ancionts  by  taking  their  subjects  from 
modern  times,  but  would  those  who  are  fond  of  these  stories  [>ut 
aside  those  books  on  antique  lore  and  things  far  off,  and  take  an 
interest  in  modern  writings?  Yang  T.se  Yiln  wrote  tl"'  T  ni-hsilan,  and 
composed  the  Fa-yen, 1  but  Chang  I'o  Siing  did  not  dei^n  to  cast  a 
look  upon  those  books.  As  lie  was  living  with  Yang  Tse  Yiln 
shoulder  to  shoulder,  he  had  a  poor  opinion  of  what  b«'  said.  Had 
Yang  Tse  Yiln  lived  prior  to  him,  Chang  Po  Sung  would  have  looked 
upon  him  as  a  gold  safr. 

One  hears  people  say  that  the  sagi's  of  old  possessed  most 
brilliant  qualities,  and  accomplished  wonderful  works,  lltmce  Con- 
fucius said,  "  Great  indeed  was  Yao  as  a  sovereign  ！  How  majestic 
was  he!  It  is  only  Heaven  tliat  is  grand,  and  only  Yao  corres- 
ponded to  it.  How  vast  was  his  virtue!  The  people  could  find 
no  name  for  it.  How  majestic  was  he  in  the  works  wliicli  he  ac- 
complished!   How  glorious  in   the  elegant  regulations  which  he 

1  These  two  works  of  the  philosoplier  Yany  Tse  】'iin  have  come  down  to  us. 
The  more  celebrated  of  the  two  is  the  Fa-ym,  the  T'ai-hman,  ^oi-t/uant  an  elucidation 
of  the  Yikmg,  is  very  obscure. 


Digitized  by  Google 


178 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Crititjue. 


instituted  ！  " 1  Shun  followed  Yao,  and  <lid  not  impair  his  grand 
institutions,  and  Yil  succeeded  Sh"n、  and  did  not  mar  his  great 
works.  Subsequently  、vt'  come  to  T  aug.  He  rose  in  arms,  and 
defeated  Chufi,  and  Wu  Waug  took  the  battle-axe,  and  punished 
Clu/u."1  Nothing  is  said  about  majesty  or  glory,  we  hear  only  of 
lighting  and  defeating.  The  t[ualities  of  these  princos  were  bad, 
tlierefore  tlicy  appealed  to  arms.  Tlit*y  waged  war,  ami  neglected 
the  arts  of  pea e.  That  explains  wliy  they  could  not  get  along 
together.  When  tlie  Ch  in  and  Han  period  arrived,  swords  were 
drawn,  and  conclusions  tried  everywhere.  Thus  L'h'in  conquered 
the  empire.  When  Ch  in  was  in  possession  of  it,  uo  felicitous  omen 
appeared  as  the  ph<pnix  e.  g.,  wliicli  comes,  whon  all  the  States  are 
at  peace.  Does  that  not  show  their  moral  impotence  ami  tlie  poor- 
ness of  their  achievements? 

This  statement  is  unreasonable.  A  sage  is  born  by  a  fusion 
of  the  fluids  of  Heaven  and  Earth :  lie  docs  great  things,  wlien  lie 
takes  the  reins  of  government.  But  tins  fusion  of  the  fluids  does 
not  only  take  placr  in  thr  past  and  loriuerly  in  iV、v  instances;  why 
tlien  should  a  sai»e  alone  be  good  ？  Tho  masses  are  inclined  to 
cherish  tho  past,  and  decry  tlie  present,  (o  think  nothing  of  what 
they  bcliold,  and  very  much  of  what  tliey  have  heard.  Besides, 
they  sec  that  in  the  Classics  and  othor  works  the  excellence  of 
sages  and  wise  men  is  painted  in  the  most  vivid  colours,  and  that 
Confucius  extols  tin*  works  of  Yao  and  Shun  still  more.  Then  th«y 
have  been  told  that  Yao  and  Yd  abdicated,  and  declined  the  throne, 
whereas  T  any  and  Wu  fought  for  it,  and  snatched  it  from  their 
predecessors.  Consequently  they  think  that  in  olden  times  the 
sages  wert"  better  than  now,  and  that  their  works,  and  their  civiliz- 
ing influence  was  greater  than  in  latt'r  times.  The  Classics  contain 
highly  coloured  reports,  and  extravagant  and  exaggerated  stories 
are  current  amoug  the  people.  Those  who  study  the  Classics  and 
read  books  all  know  this. 

Confucius  said,  "  Chous  wickedness  was  not  so  very  great. 
Therefore  tlie  superior  man  hates  to  consort  with  base  persons,  for 
the  faults  of  the  whole  world  are  laid  to  tlieir  charge."3  People 
always  will  contrast  ( 'liieh  and  Clmt  with  Ya/>  and  S/iun.  When 
they  have  any  praise  to  bestow,  they  give  is  to  Yao  and  Shu", 

1  Anakcts  VUI,  19. 

*  When  ( Itou  was  defeated,  lie  burned  himself  on  tlie  "  Deer  Terrace."  After- 
wards W  u  Wamj  sliot  three  arrows  at  the  corpse,  struck  at  it  witii  his  sword,  and 
with  liis  battle-axi;  severed  tlie  liead  from  the  body.    Cf.  Shi-chi  chap.  4,  p.  11. 

3  AnalrcU  XIX,  20. 


Digitized  by  Google 


The  Eijuality  of  the  Ages. 


and,  wlien  they  speak  of  any  wickedness,  they  impute  it  to  C/iou 
and  Chi eli.  Since  Confucius  says  tliat  the  wickedness  of  Chou  was 
not  so  very  great,  we  cou elude  that  the  virtue  of  Yao  and  Shun 
was  not  so  extraordinary  either.  The  resignation  of  Yao  and  Shim 
and  the  overthrow  of  the  preceding  dynasties  by  T a$iy  and  Wu 
were  predetermined  by  the  fate  of  Heaven.  It  could  not  he  achieved 
by  goodness  or  badness,  or  be  brought  about  by  human  actions. 
If  T  ang  and  [Vu  had  lived  in  the  time  of  Yao  and  Shun,  they  would 
also  have  abdicated  tlie  throne  instead  of  defeating  their  precliM*es- 
8ors,  arid  had  Yat)  and  Shun  lived  in  tlic  Yin  and  ( hou  dynasties, 
they  would  likewise  have  overthrown  their  opponents,  and  not 
have  declined  the  tlirone.  VV  hat  has  really  been  fate,  is  by  people 
thoughtlessly  described  as  goodness  or  wickedness.  At  the  period, 
when  according  to  the  Classics  all  the  States  were  living  in  har- 
mony, til  ere  was  also  Tnn  Chu,、  and  when  the  phipnix  made  its 
appearance,  there  were  at  the  same  time  tlie  Yu  Mi/io,2  against 
wliom  every  one  had  to  take  up  arms  and  light  continually. 
How  did  goodness  and  wickedness  or  great  and  small  virtue 
come  in? 

They  say  that  tl"'  wickediu'ss  of  Chieh  and  C/tou  was  worse 
than  that  of  doomed  Ch  in%  but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  must  admit 
that  as  for  wickedness  doomed  Ch  in  was  ahead  of  Chieh  and  C/tou.9 
There  is  the  same  contrast  Ijetween  the  excellence  of  die  I  Inn  and 
the  depravity  of  the  Ch  in  dynasty  as  between  Yao  and  Shun  on 
the  one,  and  Chieh  and  Chou  on  the  other  side.  Doomed  ('It  in  und 
Han  belong  both  to  the  later  generations.  Since  the  wickt'dness 
of  doomed  Ch， in  is  worse  than  that  of  Chieh  and  Chou,  we  may 
infer  that  in  virtue  the  great  Han  are  not  outrivalled  by  Yao  and 
Shun.  Yao  consolidated  tlie  various  States,  but  his  work  did  not 
last.  The  plicpnix  which  aj)peared  under  tlie  reign  of  Shun  was 
five  times  attracted  by  Hsikin  Ti.、  Under  the  reign  of  Ming  Ti 
lucky  omens  and  portents  were  seen  in  great  numbers.5  Omens 
appear,  because  there  is  high  virtue.  When  the  omens  are  equal, 
the  arhievements  must  be  on  a  level  too.  Sliould  llsiian  Ti  and 
Hs'uio  Ming  Ti  be  inferior  ami  not  come  up  to  Ycut  and  Shun,  how 
could  thev  evoke  the  omens  of  Yao  and  SJmn? 

1  The  degenerate  son  of  virtuous  Yao. 

*  Aboriginal  tribes,  against  which  Sfvm  had  to  fight.    Vid.  p.  404. 

*  Tlie  hatred  of  tlic  scholars  of  tlie  Han  time  towards  ('hi"  Shih  Huang  Ti 
was  still  frealicr  and  therefore  more  intense  than  tlicir  aversion  to  (  hieh  and  Ohou. 

*  Cf.  p.  359. 
1  Cf.  p.  372. 


Digitized  by  Google 


480 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


Under  Ktumg  Wu  7V1  dragons  rose,  and  phoenixes  came  forth. 
If,  when  he  got  the  empire,  things  left  in  the  street  were  picked 
up,  did  lie  not  equal  Tang  of  tile  Yin  and  Wu  of  the  Chou  dynasty 
at  least? 

People  say  that  Citing-  and  K(ang  of  Chou  did  not  impair  tlie 
imposing  works  of  Whi  Wang,  and  that  Shun  in  his  glory  did  not 
mar  the  brilliant  achievements  of  Yao.  Our  present  sage  and  eu- 
lightenod  sovereign  is  cuiitinuiiig  the  blessings  and  the  prosperity 
of  the  reigns  of  h'uang  Wu  Ti  and  Ih'uio  Ming  7*,s  without  the 
slightest  symptom  of  a  decline.4  Why  should  lie  not  rank  with 
Shun  and  Yfl  in  remote  antiquity,  and  be  on  a  par  with  CltSng  and 
K  ang  later  on?  It  is  berause  the  Five  Eraperora  and  the  Three 
Rulera  lived  previous  to  tlic  classical  writings,  that  the  chronicles 
of  the  Han  time  look  up  to  them,  and  that  the  writers  imagiiie 
tliat  in  ancicMit  times  there  wcvv,  sages  and  excellent  mt'n,  who 
accomplished  great  works,  whereas  later  generations  have  de<*linotl. 
and  that  their  culture  is  low. 

1  Cf.  p.  3<»5. 

a  The  Emperor  Ch'eng  reigned  from  1115  to  KITH,  K  any  from  1078  to  1052. 

*  The  Emperor  Chang  Ti,  7ti  89  a.d.,  who  succeeded  Ming  Ti.  Under  his 
reign  the  Lun-hhig  seems  to  have  been  written.    Vid.  p.  372  Note  3. 

*  The  roigns  of  tltesc  three  first  sovereigns  of  the  later  Han  dynasty  were 
prosperous  indeed. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations.  481 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 
Exaggerations  {Yiirtseng). 

The  Records  say  that  Sages  toil  and  trouble  for  the  world, 
devoting  to  it  all  their  thoughts  and  energies,  that  this  liarasses 
their  spirits,  and  affects  their  bodies.  Consequently  Yao  is  reported 
to  have  been  like  shrivelled  flesh,  and  Sl"tn  like  dried  food,  whereas 
Chieh  and  Chou  had  an  eml>onpoint  over  a  foot  thick.  One  may  well 
say  that  the  bodies  of  Sages  working  hard  for  the  world,  and 
straining  their  minfls  for  mankind,  are  weakened,  and  that  they 
do  not  become  stout  or  fat,  but  to  say  that  Yao  and  Shun  were 
like  dried  flesh  or  food,  and  that  the  embonpoint  of  Chieh  and  Chou 
measured  over  a  foot  ia  exaggerating. 

Duke  Httan  of  Ch'i  said:—"  Before  T  had  got  liold  of  Kuan 
Chung,  I  had  the  greatest  difficulties,  after  1  had  got  him,  every- 
thing was  easy."  Duke  Httan  did  not  equal  Yao  and  S7〃'《，  nor 
was  A' 瞧 Chung  on  a  par  with  Yd  and  Hsieh.1  If  Duke  Httan  found 
things  easy,  how  could  they  have  been  difficult  to  Yao  and  Shu"? 
From  the  fact  that  Duke  Httan,  having  obtained  the  assistance  of 
Kuan  Chung,  went  on  easily,  we  may  infer  tliat  Yao  and  S/tun  after 
having  secured  tlie  services  of  Yil  and  Hs'uh  cannot  have  been  in 
difficulties.  A  man  at  ease  has  not  mauy  sorrows.  Without  sorrows 
he  has  no  troubles,  and  if  he  is  not  troubled,  his  body  does  not 
wither. 

Shun  found  perfect  peace  brought  about  by  Yaoy  both  carried 
on  the  virtues  of  the  preceding  generation  and  continued  the  paci- 
fication of  tlie  border  tribes.  Yao  had  still  some  trouble,  hut  Shun 
could  live  at  ease  and  unmolested.  The  Book  of  History  says  that 
the  Supreme  Ruler  gave  repose,2  which  refers  to  S/iun,  for  Shun 
found  peace  everywhere,  he  continued  tlie  government,  appointed 
intelligent  officers,  employed  able  men,  and  enjoyed  a  dignified 
repose,  while  the  Empire  was  well  administrated.    Therefore  Con- 

1 and  Hrieh  were  both  ministers  of  】'ao  and  Shun.    Vu  became  emperor 

， ShH—  Part  V,  Bk.  XIV,  5  {Legge,  Classics  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II，  p.  455).  The 
passage  haa  been  variously  explaiued. 

Lun  -  Hong  31 


Digitized  by  Google 


482 


Lun  -  Hong :  E.  Oitiijue. 


fiicius  exclaims:—"  Grand  were  Shun  and  Yfi  wlio,  possessing  the 
Empire,  did  not  much  (； are  for  it."1  In  spite  of  this  Shun  is  said 
to  have  been  dried  up  like  preserved  meat,  as  though  lie  had  l>een 
lacking  in  virtue,  and  had  taken  over  a  state  in  decay  like  Con- 
fuci'ui,  wlio  restlessly  wandered  about  seeking  employment,  having 
no  place  to  rest  in,  no  way  to  walk,  halting  aud  tumbling  down 
on  the  roads,  his  bones  protruding. 

C/iou  passed  the  whole  night  drinking.  Sediments  lay  about 
in  mounds,  and  there  was  a  lake  of  wine.  Chou  was  swimming 
in  wine,  stopping  neither  by  day  nor  by  night.  The  result  nmst 
have  been  sickness.  Being  sick,  he  could  not  enjoy  eating  aud 
drinking,  and  if  lie  did  not  enjoy  eating  aud  drinking,  his  fatness 
could  not  attain  one  foot  in  thickness. 

The  Book  of  History  remarks  that  debauchery  was  what  they2 
liked,  and  that  they  could  not  reach  a  great  age.5  Prince  Wu  Chi 
of  HW4  passed  his  nights  feasting,  but  these  excesses  proved  such 
a  poison  to  liim,  that  he  died.  If  Chou  did  not  die,  his  fxtru- 
vagance  ought  at  least  to  have  shattered  his  system,  (liieh  and 
Chou  doing  the  same,  ought  to  have  contracted  tlie  same  sickness. 
To  say  tliat  their  embonpoint  was  over  a  loot  thick  is  not  only  an 
exaggeration,  but  an  untruth. 

Of  Chou  there  is  further  a  record  that  his  strength  was  such, 
that  he  cojild  twist  iron,  and  straighten  out  a  hook,  pull  out  a 
beam,  and  replace  it  by  a  pillar.  This  is  meant  to  be  illustrative 
of  his  great  strength.5  Men  like  Fei  Lien  aud  ( >  Lai°  were  much 
liked  by  him,  and  stood  high  in  liis  favour,  wliich  is  tantamount 
to  saying  tliat  he  was  a  sovereign  very  fond  of  cunning  and 
strength,  and  attracted  people  possessing  those  qualities. 

Now  tliere  are  those  who  say  that,  when  Wu  Wang  defeated 
Ch"u、  tlie  blades  of  liis  weapons  were  not  stained  with  blood. 
When  a  man  with  such  strength,  that  he  could  twist  iron  and 

1  AnaUcts  VOI,  18. 

s  The  last  emperors  of  the  HMa  dynasty. 

a  Quoted  from  the  S/,uki,,ff  Part  V,  Bk.XV,7  (Legge,  ClasMo  Vol.  UI,  Pt.  U, 
p.  4G8). 

4  Died  244  b.c.  Wu  Chi  was  a  famous  general  of  the  VV>/  State,  who  in- 
flicted some  crusliing  defeats  upon  the  armies  of  Ch'in.  For  sonic  time  he  succeeded 
in  checking  the  cucroachmciits  of  '  fi  in.  It  was  not,  until  his  later  years,  that  he 
retired  from  publir  life,  and  gave  liimself  up  to  debauchery. 

'。 The  S/ti-cM  chap.  3,  p.  10  likewise  ascribe-s  superhuman  forces  and  extra- 
ordinary natural  endowments  tu  the  last  ruler  of  tlie  Ilsin  dynasty. 

6  Fei  f'ien  and  O  Lni  were  two  clever,  but  wicked  consellors  of  King  Chou. 
In  the  Slii-chi  chap.  3，  p.  11  v.    1-n  Lien  is  called  Fei  Chtmg. 


Digitized  by  Gc 


Exaggerations. 


straighten  out  hooks,  with  such  supporters  as  Fei  Lien  and  0  Lai 
tried  issues  with  the  army  of  C/<om,  1  Wu  Wang,  however  virtuous 
he  may  have  been,  could  not  have  deprived  him  of  liis  natural 
abilities,  and  Chou,  wicked  though  he  was,  would  not  have  lost 
the  sympathy  of  his  associates.  Although  he  was  captured  by 
Wu  Wang,  some  ten  or  hundred  people  must  have  been  killed  or 
wounded  at  that  time.  If  the  blades  wore  not  stained  witli  blood, 
it  would  contradict  the  report  of  Chous  great  strength  and  the 
support  he  received  from  Fei  Lien  and  0  La;.2 

The  auspicious  portents  of  Wu  Wang  did  not  surpass  those 
of  K(w  Tsu.  Wu  Wang  saw  a  lucky  augury  in  a  wliito  fish  and  a 
red  crow,3  Kao  Tm  in  the  fact  that,  when  lit'  cut  a  big  snako  in 
two,  an  old  woman  cried  on  the  road.4  Wu  Wang  had  tlie  suo'mir 
of  eight  hundred  harons,  Kao  Tm  was  supported  by  all  the  patriotic 
soldiers  of  the  Empire,  H  m  Wang's  features  were  like  those  of  a 
staring  slieep.5  Kao  7Vm  had  a  dragon  face,  a  hi^h  nose,  a  reel 
ueck,  a  beautiful  beard  and  72  black  spots  on  liis  body.9  When 
Kno  Tsu  fled,  and  Lii  lion 7  was  in  the  marshes,  she  saw  a  liaze 
over  his  head.  It  is  not  known  that  Wn  Wang  had  such  an  oineu. 
In  short,  his  features  bore  more  auspicious  signs  than  W,"  \Van(/'n 
look,  and  tlie  portents  uere  clearer  than  the  fish  and  the  cruw. 
The  patriotic  soldiers  of  the  Kinpire  assembled  to  help  the  //«;*, 9 
and  were  more  powerful  than  all  the  barons. 

Wu  Wang  succeeded  King  Vhnu,  and  Kao  Tsn  took  over  the 
inheritance  of  Erh  S/ti/t  Huang  Ti  of  the  house  of  ('ft  in,  wliieli  was 
much  worse  than  that  of  King  Chou.  The  whole  empire  rebelled 
against  67////,  with  much  in  ore  violence  than  under  the  Yin  (lynasty. 
When  Kao  Tsu  had  dofrated  the  (  h  in,  lie  had  still  to  <lestrov 
Hsiany  Yil.  The  battle  field  was  soaked  with  blood,  and  many 
thousands  of  dead  bodies  lay  strewn  about.     The  losses  of  the 


1  The  (Jhim  dynasty  which  overthrew  the  Shang  or  I'm  dynasty.  The  name 
of  King  Cfum  Hsin  of  the  Shang  dynasty  ha«  the  same  sound,  but  is  quite  a  different 
character. 

a  According  to  the  Shi-chi  and  the  Shuking  King  Chou  fled,  when  his  troops 
had  been  routed  by  H'm  VVany,  and  burned  himself,  dressed  in  liis  royal  robfs,  in 
the  palace.    He  was  not  caught  by  Wu  Wang. 

»  Cf.  p.  130. 

*  Cf.  p.  178. 

5  Wu  Wang  had  large,  staring  sheep's  eyes. 

6  Cf.  p.  305. 

7  The  wife  of  Han  Kao  Tm. 

8  Cf.  p.  17H. 

9  The  Han  dynasty. 

31* 


Digitized  by  Google 


484 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


defeated  army  were  enormous.  People  had,  as  it  were,  to  die 
again  and  again,  before  the  Empire  was  won.  The  insurgents 
were  exterminated  by  force  of  arms  with  the  utmost  severity. 
Therefore  it  cannot  be  true  that  the  troops  of  Chou 1  did  not  even 
stain  their  swords  with  blood.  One  may  say  that  the  conquest 
was  easy,  but  to  say  that  the  blades  were  not  stained  with  blood, 
is  an  exaggeration. 

When  the  Chou  dynasty  conquered  the  empire  of  the  Yin,  it 
was  written  in  the  strategical  book  of  T'ai  Kung"*  that  a  young 
boy  brought  up  [in  the  camp]  Tan  Chwo  had  said ： 一 "The  troops 
wliich  are  to  destroy  Yin  have  arrived  in  the  plain  of  Mu}  At 
dawn  they  carry  lamps  with  fat."  According  to  the  "  Completion 
of  tlie  War  " 4  the  battle  in  the  plain  of  Mu  was  so  sanguinary,  that 
the  pestles 5  were  swimming  in  the  blood,  and  over  a  thousand  Li 
the  earth  was  red.  After  this  account  the  overthrow  of  the  Yin 
by  the  Chou  must  have  been  very  much  like  the  war  between  the 
Han  and  Cli  in  dynasties.  The  statement  that  the  conquest  of  the 
Yin  territory  was  so  easy,  that  the  swords  were  not  stained  with 
blood  is  meant  as  a  ronipliment  to  the  virtue  of  Wu  Watig^  but  it 
exaggerates  the  truth.  All  tilings  of  this  world  must  be  neither 
over-  nor  under-estimated.  If  we  examine,  how  tlie  facts  follow 
one  another,  all  the  evidence  comes  forth,  and  on  tliis  evidence 
the  truth  or  the  untruth  ran  be  established. 

People  glorify  Chan's  force  by  sayiug  that  lie  could  twist 
iron,  and  at  the  same  time  praise  Wu  Wnng^  because  the  weapons, 
with  which  he  destroyed  his  opponent,  were  not  blood-stained. 
Now,  if  anybody  opposed  his  enemies  with  a  strength  that  could 
twist  iron  ami  straighten  out  a  hook,  lie  must  have  been  a  match 
for  Mhig  /V/f  and  Ihiu  Yii,n  and  he  wlio  managed  to  defeat  Lis  ad- 
versary through  his  virtue  without  staining  his  swords  with  blood, 
must  have  belonged  to  the  Three  Riders  or  to  the  Five  Emperors.1 
Endowed  with  sufficient  strength  to  twist  iron,  tlie  one  could  not 
be  compelled  to  submission,  whereas  the  other,  possessing  such 

1  The  Chou  dynasty. 

■  T  ai  Kung  Wany,  the  counsellor  of  Wu  Want;,  laid  the  plans  of  the  campaign 
against  the  Yin  dynasty. 

8  This  plain  was  situated  in  Horum. 

4  This  is  the  title  of  the  3d  Book  of  the  5th  Part  of  the  Shukmg.  (Cf.  Ltggt, 
Claaaics  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II,  p.  315.) 

&  With  which  the  soldiers  were  pounding  their  rice. 

6  Maty  Pin  and  Hsia 】'" arc  both  famous  for  their  gigantic  strength.  The 
one  could  tear  off  the  horns,  the  other  the  tail  from  a  living  ox.  Both  lived  in  the 

Chou  epoch. 

7  The  legendary  rulers  accomplished  everything  by  their  virtues. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations. 


485 


virtue  that  his  weapons  were  not  reddened  with  blood,  ought  not 
to  have  lost  one  soldier.  If  we  praise  Chans  strengtli,  Wu  Wangs 
virtue  is  disparaged,  and,  if、  we  extol  Wu  Wang,  Chons  strength 
dwindles  away.  The  twisting  of  iron  and  the  fact  that  the  blades 
were  not  covered  with  blood  are  inconsistent,  and  the  praise  be- 
stowed simultaneously  on  the  Yin  and  the  Chou  mutually  clashes. 
From  this  incompatibility  it  follows  that  one  proposition  must  be 
wrong. 

Confucius  1  said: ― kk Chon's  wickedness  was  not  so  very  great. 
Therefore  the  superior  man  hates  to  consort  with  base  persons, 
for  the  faults  of  the  whole  world  are  laid  to  their  charge."2  Mencitts 
said ：  ― "  From  the  '  Completion  of  the  War '  I  accept  but  two  or  three 
paragraphs.  If  the  most  humane  defeated  the  inhumane,  how 
could  so  much  blood  be  spilt,  that  clubs  swam  iu  it? " s  The 
utterance  of  Co"fuc"ts  would  seem  to  uphold  the  swimming  of 
clubs,  whereas  the  words  of  Menvius  are  very  much  akin  to  the 
assertion  that  the  weapons  were  not  stained  with  blootl.  The 
lirst  overshoots  the  mark,  the  second  falls  short  of  it.  Thus 
a  Sage  and  a  Worthy 4  pass  a  judgment  on  Chou,  but  both  use 
a  different  weight,  and  one  gives  him  credit  for  more  thau  the 
other. 

Chou  was  not  as  depraved  as  Wang  Mang.%  Chou  killed  Pi 
A'an,*  but  Wang  Maug  poisoned  the  emperor  P  ing  Ti."  Chou  became 
emperor  by  succession,  Wang  Mang  usurped  the  throne  of  the  Han. 
To  assassinate  one's  sovereign  is  infinitely  worse  tlian  the  execution 
of  a  minister,  and  succession  to  the  throne  is  quite  different  from 
usurpation.  Deods  against  which  the  wholo  people  rose  up.  must 
liave  been  worse  than  those  of  ( 'Imu.  When  the  Han  destroyed 
Wang  Mang,  tlieir  troops  were  exhausted  at  Kf nn-ijm>g,%  the  deaths 
numbering  ten  thousand  and  more.  .  When  the  forces  readied  the 


1  Analects  XIX,  20.  In  our  text  of  the  iMn-yu  these  words  arc  not  spoken 
by  Con/uciut  himself,  but  l»y  his  disciple  Tsc  Ktmg. 

2  A  good  man  avoids  the  society  of  disreputable  pooj)li%  for  every  JwickeHn«s» 
is  put  to  tlieir  account,  even  if  I  hey  be  innocent.  Thus  King  ( 'hmi  has  been  better 
than  his  name,  which  has  become  a  by-word  for  every  crime.    Cf.  p.  47S. 

*  Mmciu>  Hook  VII,  Vt.  II,  cliap.  3.    The  most  humane  was  Wu  、、'""〃. 

*  In  tlie  estimation  of  the  Coiifuriani.sts  Menrinn  is  only  a  Worthy,  not  a 
Sage  like  (onfaciiu. 

s   Wang  Mang  the  usurper  reigned  from  i)  to  2.5  a.d. 

" Pi  h'an  was  a  relative  of  Chou.   When  he  remonstrated  with  him  upon  his 
excesses,  Choit  caused  him  to  he  di-sembowelled. 
7  1  fi  A.n. 

*  A  citv  in  southern  H<man, 


Digitized  by  Google 


486 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


Chien  terrace, 1  tlie  blood  made  all  the  foot-prints  and  ruts  invisible, 
ronsetjuently  it  cannot  be  true  that,  when  the  Chon  conquered 
the  Empire,  the  weapons  were  uot  even  stained  with  blood. 


It  is  on  record  that  Win  Wanff  could  drink  a  thousand  bumpers 
of  wine  and  Confucim  a  hundred  gallons.  We  are  to  infer  from 
tins,  how  great  the  virtue  of  these  Sages  was,  which  enabled  thera 
to  master  the  wine.  If  at  one  sitting  they  could  drink  a  thousaud 
bumpers  or  a  hundred  gallons,  they  must  have  been  drunkards,  and 
not  sages. 

In  drinking  wine  there  ia  a  certain  method,  and  the  chests 
and  stomaclis  of  the  Sages  must  have  been  of  nearly  the  same  size 
as  those  of  otliors.  Taking  food  together  with  wine,  they  would 
have  eaten  a  hundred  oxen,  while  drinking  one  thousand  bumpers, 
and  tpn  aheej)  would  correspond  to  a  hundred  gallons.  If  they 
did  justice  to  a  thousand  bumpers  and  a  hundred  oxen,  or  to  a 
hundred  gallons  and  ten  sheep,  Wihi  Wang  must  have  been  as  gi- 
gantic as  the  Prince  of  Fang-f^ng 2  and  Confucius  like  a  Great  77. 3 
\Y4n  Wany  and  Confucius  did  not  equal  the  Prince  of  Fong-f^ny  or 
tlie  Great  Ti  in  length.  Eating  and  drinking  such  enormous  quant- 
ities with  small  bodies  would  be  derogatory  to  the  grandeur  of 
Wen  Wang,  and  undignified  in  Confucius.  According  to  the  Chaj)ter 
" Chin  Ktio、"  *  Wrn  Wang  would  say  morning  and  evening: 一 "pour 
out  this  wine  in  libation." 5  This  shows  how  careful  Wen  Wang 
was  about  wine.  Because  lie  was  so  careful  morning  and  evening, 
the  ])eoplo  were  converted  thereby.  Had  h\a  advice  to  be  careful 
only  boon  for  outside,  while  he  himself  emptied  a  thousand  bumpers 
at  lionic,  the  otForts  to  **ducat4»  the  people  and  his  subjects  would 
liavo  been  in  vain.  And  how  would  he  have  distinguished  liiniself 
from  the  depravity  of  Cfiou,  whose  successor  he  was? 

Moreover,  at  wliat  timo  should  the  thousand  bumpers  and 
the  hundred  gallons  have  been  drunk?   Wlien  Whi  Wany  and  Con- 

1  A  terrace  near  (  hanp-nn-fu,  where  Wang  Mamj  made  his  last  stand. 
J  A  feudal  prince  of  gigantic  size  said  to  have  lived  under  the  Emperor 
who  put  him  to  death.    CI*.  Han  Fri  Tife  rhap.  !9,  p.  11  v. 

3  Ti  is  n  general  name  for  northern  barbarians.    The  Shaking,  Hung-fon, 
t  speaks  of  a  '/''•  measuring  over  :A)  feet,  Ku  Lianff  of  three  Ti  brotliers,  of 

whirl)  one  was  so  enormous,  that  his  body  covered  9  Moa. 

4  /.  r.     Aiiiiutinreinent  about  wine."  酒 

5  Cf.  p.  121. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations. 


487 


fucim  offered  wine  in  sacrifice?  Tlien  the  sacrificial  meat  、v()ul(l 
not  have  sufficed  to  satiate  them.  At  the.  shooting- least?  At  the 
shooting-feast  there  were  certain  recognised  rules  for  drinking  wine.1 
If  at  a  private  banquet  the)'  gave  their  guest«  wine  to  drink,  tliey 
must  have  given  to  all  their  inferiors  equally.  The  emperor  would 
first  take  three  cups,  and  then  retire.  Drinking  more  than  three, 
he  would  have  become  intoxicated,  and  misbehaved  himself.  But 
Win  Wang  and  Confucius  were  men  to  whom  propriety  was  every- 
thing. If  tliey  had  given  so  much  to  their  attendants,  that  they 
became  druuk  and  disorderly,  they  themselves  taking  a  thousand 
bumpers  of  wine  or  a  hundred  gallons,  they  would  have  been  like 
ChU'U  and  Chou  or,  to  say  the  least,  drunkards.  How  could  tliey 
tlien  have  manifested  their  virtues  and  improved  others,  hmv  ac- 
quired a  name  still  venerated  by  posterity? 

There  is  a  saying  that  the  virtuous  do  not  become  intoxi- 
cated. Sfein*;  that  the  Sages  possess  the  highest  virtue,  one  lias 
wrongly  credited  \Y,'n  Wang  with  a  thousand  bumpers  and  foolishly 
given  a  hundred  gallons  to  Confucius. 


Chou  is  roportt'd  to  have  been  an  incorrigible  tippler.  Tlic 
sediments  lay  about  in  mounds.  Ho  liad  a  lake  full  of  wine,2  and 
filled  three  thousand  persons  with  liquor  like  cattle.  Carousing  he 
made  night  day,  and  evon  forgot  the  date. 

Chou  may  have  been  addicted  to  drink,  but  he  sought  pleasure. 
Had  his  wine-lake  been  in  tlu*  court-yard.  tlu*n  one  c<nild  not  say 
that  in  carousing  he  made  night  day.  J'hia  expression  uoukl  only 
be  correct,  if*  lie  shut  himself  up  in  liis  rooms  behind  closed  win- 
dows, using  candle-light.  If  lie  was  sitting  in  liis  moms,  1">  must 
havo  risen  and  gone  to  the  court-yard  eacli  time  I"'  wislunl  to 
drink,  and  then  n* turned  to  his  seat,  an  endless  trouble,  wliii-li 
would  have  (lt'privc,l  him  of  all  enjoyment.  Had  the  wi no- lake 
been  in  the  inner  apartincuts,  then  the  three  thousand  people  must 
liave  been  pla'.('(l  close  to  tin*  lake.  Their  amusemont  would  have 
consisft'd  in  bowing  down  to  drink  wine  from  the  lake,  and  in 
rising  to  taste  tlic  dainty  dislics,  siti^iii«;  and  music  b«*ing  in  front 

1  The  shooting-feasts  referred  to  are  the  competitions  of  archery,  held  in 
am-ieiit  times  at  the  royal  court,  at  tl"，  feudal  courts,  and  at  the  meetings  in  the 
country.  A  banquet  was  contjeitcd  wit!)  these  festivities.  Cf.  Uygrt  The  Li  hi 
(Sacred  Books  of  the  East  Vol.  XXVII)  p.  57. 

a  Tliis  wine- lake  is  mentioned  in  the  '、7"'-cAi'  cliap.  3,  j>.  l()v. 


Digitized  by  Google 


488 


Lun  -  H^ng :  E.  Critique. 


of  them.  If  they  were  really  sitting  quite  close  to  the  lake,  their 
drinking  in  front  would  have  interfered  with  their  dining,  and  the 
concert  could  not  have  been  in  front.  Provided  that  at  the  banquet 
they  had  thus  unmannerly  sucked  wine  from  tbe  lake  like  oxen, 
they  would  not  h&xc  required  any  crups  during  the  dinner,  and 
would  also  have  gulped  (lo、vn  and  devoured  tlie  food  like  tigers. 
From  this  we  see  that  the  wine-lake  and  the  drinking  like  cattle 
are  mere  stories. 


There  is  another  tradition  that.  Chou  had  made  a  forest  by 
hanging  up  meat,  and  that  lie  caused  naked  males  and  females  to 
chase  each  otlier  in  this  forest,1  which  would  be  drunken  folly, 
and  unrestrained  debauchery.  Meat  is  to  be  put  into  the  mouth. 
What  the  mouth  eats,  must  be  clean,  not  soiled.  Now,  if,  as  they 
say,  naked  males  and  females  cliased  each  otlier  among  the  meat, 
how  could  it  remain  clean  ？  If  they  were  drunk,  and  did  not  care, 
whether  it  was  clean  or  not,  they  must  liavo  bathed  together  in 
wine,  and  then  run  naked  one  after  the  other  among  the  meat. 
Why  should  tlu-y  not  have  done  this?  Since  nothing  is  said  about 
tlioir  bathing  in  wine,  we  may  be  sure  that  neither  did  they  chase 
eacli  other  naked  among  the  meat. 

There  is  another  version  to  the  effect  tliat  wiue  was  being 
carried  about  in  carts  and  roast-meat  on  horseback,  and  that  one 
hundred  and  twenty  days  were  reckoned  one  night.  However,  if 
the  account  about  the  wine-lake  is  correct,  it  cannot  be  true  that 
tlie  wine  was  transported  in  carts,  and  if  the  meat  was  suspended 
so,  as  to  form  a  forest,  the  statomont  tliat  roast-meat  was  carried 
about  ou  horeobaok  must  be  wrong. 

It  may  have  liapponod  that,  wlion  Chou  was  flushed  with  drink, 
lio  overturned  the  wine,  which  spread  over  the  floor,  whence  the 
story  of  the  wine-lake.  VVhon  the  wine  was  distilled,  the  sediments 
wen-  lioapctl  up,  tlim'f"rp  tlie  tab*  that  tlie  sediments  lay  in  mounds. 
Meat  、vas  Iiuii^  up  in  tret's,  theiu-c  the  report  that  a  forest  was 
made  of  meat.  The  shade  and  darkm'89  of  this  forest  may  soiiietimt's 
have  been  visito<l  by  people  with  the  intention  of  doing  things 
shunning  tl"'  lijilit  of  (lay,  whidi  led  to  tlie  belief  tliat  they  chased 
fach  other  naked.  IVrliaps  wint'  was  transported  once  on  a  deer-car- 
riage,2 vvliicli  would  accouut  for  the  story  that  wine  was  being 


Quoted  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  3,  p.  11. 
A  royal  carriage  ornamcntod  with  deers. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations. 


480 


carried  about  in  carts,  and  roast-meat  on  horseback.  Tlio  revelry 
may  have  extended  once  over  ten  nights,  hence  the  hundred  and 
twenty  days.  Perhaps  Chou  was  intoxicated  and  out  of  his  mind, 
wlien  he  inquired,  what  day  it  was.  Then  people  said  that  lie 
had  forgotten  dates  altogether. 

When  Chou  Kung 1  invested  K  ang  <SAu2  1"'  spoke  to  hi  in  about 
Chou' s  wine  drinking^  wishing  that  he  should  know  all  about  it,  and 
take  a  warning,  but  he  did  not  mention  the  mounds  of  sedimeiits, 
or  the  wine-lake,  or  the  forest  made  of  meat,  or  the  revelries 
lasting  far  into  tlie  morning,  or  the  forgetting  of  dates.  What  the 
Sages  do  not  mention,  is  most  likely  unfounded. 


As  an  instance  of  Chou's  perversity  it  is  recorded  that  he 
sucked  wine  from  the  wine-lake  like  an  ox.  together  with  three- 
thousand  people.  The  Ilsia  dynasty  liad  a  hundred  (metropolitan) 
officials,  the  Yin  two  hundred,  tlie  Chou  three  hundred.  The  com- 
panions of  Chou's  Bacchanals  were  assuredly  not  common  people, 
but  officials,  and  not  minor  officials,  but  higli  ones.  Their  number 
never  could  reach  three  thousand.  The  authors  of  this  report 
wished  to  disparage  Chou,  therefore  they  said  three  thousand, 
which  is  a  gross  exaggeration. 


There  is  a  report  that  the  Duke  of  Chou 4  was  so  (！ oiidescend- 
ing  that  witli  presents  he  (； a  lied  on  simple  scholars,  living  in  poor 
houses,  and  inquired  after  their  health.  As  one  of  the  three  chief 
ministers,  a  prop  to  the  imperial  tripod,5  he  was  the  mainstay  of 
tlie  euiperor.  Those  scholars  were  persons  of  no  consequence  in 
their  hamlets.  That  a  prime  minister  should  have  flim^  away  his 
dignity  as  supporter  of  the  dynasty  in  order  to  do  homag (；  to  com- 
mon scholars,  cannot  be  true.  May  l)i、，  that  he  treated  scholars 
with  courtesy  and  condescension,  and  was  not  liaughty  towards 


1   Tun,  Duke  of  (—'hou、  a  younger  brother  of  Wa  Warty. 

a  ICang  Shu  was  the  first  prince  of  the  Wei  State  (Honan),  which  he  governed 
until  1077  b.c. 

3  Cf.  Shaking  Part  V，  Book  X,  11  {Le^ge,  he.  cit.  p.  4<>8). 

4  Chou  Kung. 

！、  The  sacrificial  tripod  is  the  emblcni  of  royalty.    The  tliree  cliicf  ministers 
are  likened  to  its  three  feet. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


poor  people,  hence  the  report  that  he  waited  upon  them.  Ht»  may 
have  raised  a  scholar  of  humble  origin,  and  received  h\m  witli  Iiis 
badge  in  liand.  People  then  said  that  he  came  with  presents  aud 
waited  upon  his  family. 


We  have  a  tradition  that  Yao  and  S/iun  were  so  thrifty,  that 
they  had  their  thatched  roofs  untrimmetl,  and  their  painted  rafters 
unliewn.  Thatched  roofB  and  painted  rafters  there  may  have  been, 
but  that  they  were  untrimmed  or  unliewn,  is  an  exaggeration.  The 
Classic  says,  "  I  1  assisted  in  completing  the  Five  Robes."2  Five 
Robes  means  the  five-coloured  robes.  If  they  put  on  five-coloured 
robes,  and  at  the  same  time  had  thatched  roofs  and  painted  rafters, 
there  would  have  been  a  great  discrepancy  between  tlie  palace 
buildings  and  the  dressses.  On  tlie  five-coloured  robes  were  painted 
the  sun,  the  moon  and  tlu»  stare.  Consequently  thatched  roofs  and 
painted  rafters  are  out  of  the  question. 


It  is  on  record  that'  Ch  in  ShiJi  Huang  It  burned  the  Hooks 
of  Poetry  and  History,3  and  buried  the  Literati  alive.  This  means 
that  by  burning  the  Books  of  Poetry  and  History  he  eradicated 
the  Five  Classics  and  other  literary  works.  The  Literati  thus 
thrown  iuto  pits  weiv  tliose,  they  say,  who  had  concealed  the 
Classics  aud  otiier  works.  When  the  books  were  burned,  and  the 
men  thrown  into  pits,  Poetry  and  History  were  extinguished.  The 
burning  of  the  Hooks  of  Poetry  and  History  and  the  assassination 
of  the  Literati  art'  indisputable.  But  tlie  allegation  that,  for  the 
purpose  of  destroying  those  bookss,  t!»e  men  were  put  to  de-atli,  is 
not  corrocl,  and  an  exaggeratiou. 

In  tl"、  34th  y«*ar  of  his  n>ign 4  Cli  in  S/iiJi  Ihmng  Ti  gave  a 
banqurt  on  the  terraco  of  ILsieu-;iang.h  Seventy  Literati  came  to 
wish   him  long  life.    The  Pu-yth.K  Chou  Ch' imj  Cli  in,  delivered  a 

1  The  Emperor  Y&. 

2  Quotation  from  tl.e  Shuking,  Yi  (  hi  Pt.  II,  Rk.  IV,  8  (Legge  Vol.  Ill'  Pt.  I, 
p.  Modern  tommeiitators  and  1,'ggr  explain 五 服 ； is  "  five  land  tenures," 
Wang  (  h  ung  as  the  Five  State  Robes  woni  by  the  Emperor  and  the  officials,  wliich 
are  mentioned  a  few  paragraphs  before  our  passage  {Lfffgr,  loc.  cit.  p.  80). 

3  Tlie  Sfiiinnff  and  tlie  Shukint/. 
«  213  u.c. 

s   Near  lliti-an-fu  in  Sherxi. 
c  An  official  title. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations. 


491 


speech,  enlogising  the  emperor's  excellence,  whereupon  Shun  Yil  Ydeh 
of  C/ii  stepped  forward,  and  reproached  C/i'in  Shih  Ihiang  Ti  for 
not  having  invested  his  kiusmen  and  iueritorioun  officials,  to  use 
them  as  his  assistants. 1  He  accused  Chou  Ch'ing  Ch  hi  of  open 
flattery.  Ch'in  ShVi  Huang  Ti  directed  the  premier  Li  Sse  to  report 
on  the  matter.  Li  Sse  blamed  Shun  Yii  Yile/t,  saying  that  the  scholars 
did  not  can*  to  learn  the  exigencies  of  modern  times,  but  were 
studying  antiquity  with  a  view  to  condemn  everything  new,  aud 
to  excite  the  masses.  JJ  Ssc  proposed  that  the  Historiographers 
be  authorized  to  burn  all  the  books  except  the  Annals  of  C/i  in, 
and  also  to  make  an  exception  in  favour  of  the  officials  in 
charge  of  the  Imperial  College.  All  the  hooks  on  poetry,  history, 
philosophy,2  and  jurisprudeuce,  wliicli  people  had  dared  to  conceal, 
were  to  be  brought  to  the  governors  and  l>urne<l  together.  Those 
who  perchance  should  dare  to  discourse  on  poetry  aud  history, 
would  be  executed  and  publicly  exposed.  Should  anybody  hold 
up  antiquity  and  decry  the  present  time,  he  was  to  be  destroyed 
together  with  his  clan.  Officials  who  saw  or  knew  of  such  cases 
without  interfering,  were  to  suffer  the  same  penalty.  Ch  in  Shih 
ffuang  Ti  approved  of  it. 

The  next  year,  which  was  the  35th  of  the  emperor's  reign, 
the  scholars  in  llsien-yamj  spread  all  kinds  of  false  rumours.  Ch  in 
S/iih  Huang  Ti  had  thfin  tried  by  the  censors.  Those  wlio  gave 
information  about  their  accomplices,  and  deiiouncod  others,  got  free 
themselves.  467  delinquents  were  all  thrown  into  pits.3 

The  burning  of  the  Books  of  Poo  try  and  History  was  tlie 
consequence  of  Shun  Yil  Ydefi  s  recriminations.  The  deaths  of  the 
literati  were  due  to  the  rumours  divulged  by  the  scholars.  Soeing 
467  men  perisli  in  pits  the  clironicler  went  a  step  farther,  stating 
that  the  literati  were  inurdered  for  tltc  purpose'  of  doing  away  with 
poetry  and  history,  and  even  saying  that  tliey  were  all  thrown 
into  pits.    Tliut  is  no  true  report  but  also  a  highly  coloured  one. 


1  The  abilition  of  feudalism  was  much  disliked  by  the  Literati. 

2  The  text  says,  the  "  discussions  of  the  hundred  authors,"  which  moans  the 
writers  on  philosopliy  and  .siience. 

8  Various  translntions  of  this  last  passage  have  l>een  j)roposcd.  Cf.  CfuicannfM, 
Mem.  H"t.  Vol.  II,  p.  1<S1  Note  2. 

The  foregoin<;  narration  is  abridged  l'roni  Shi-rAi  chap.  0,  p.  21v  et  seq.  Our 
text  speaks  of  4G7  scholars,  whereas  the  S/ti-chi  mentions  but  460  odd,  and  it  uses 
the  word  "  to  throw  into  n  pit  "  instead  of  the  vaguer  lenn     充. So  perhaps 

Wartff  Ch'untj  lias  not  nilled  from  the  Shi-rfii,  but  both  ha\  o  used  tlio  >awc  older  source. 


Digitized  by  Google 


492 


Lun-H*ng:  E.  Critiijuo. 


There  is  a  tradition  to  the  e fleet  that  "  field  by  field  were 
treated  as  Citing  K  o's  hamlet."  They  say  that  at  the  instigation 
of  Prince  Tan  of  Yenf  1  Ching  K'o  made  an  attempt  on  tlie  life  of 
the  King  of  Cfiin.3  The  latter  afterwards  caused  the  nine  relations3 
of  Ching  K  o  to  be  put  to  death.  But  his  vindictive  wrath  was 
not  yet  appeased  thereby,  and  lie  subsequently  had  all  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Ching  K'o's  village  killed,  so  that  the  whole  village  was 
exterminated.  Therefore  the  expression  "  field  by  field."  This  is 
an  exaggeration. 

Although  Ch'in  was  lawless,  the  king  had  no  reason  to  ex- 
terminate the  entire  village  of  Ching  K  o.  Ch  in  Shih  Hiumg  Ti  once 
visited  his  palace  on  the  Liang-shan.*  From  its  height  he  perceived 
that  the  carriages  and  the  horsemen  of  his  prime-miuister  Li  Sse 
were  very  gorgeous.  This  made  him  angry,  and  he  gave  utterance 
to  his  disapproval.  Tlie  attendaute  informed  Li  Sse,  who  forth- 
with diminisbed  his  carriages  and  men.  Ch  m  Shih  Huang  Ti  thus 
became  aware  that  his  words  had  leaked  out  through  the  servants, 
but  did  not  know  who  the  culprit  was.  Thereupon  he  had  all 
the  persons  near  him  arrested,  and  put  to  death.5  Later  on,  a 
meteor  fell  down  in  Tung-chiln^  and  when  it  touched  the  earth, 
became  a  stone.  Some  one  engraved  upon  the  stone  tlie  inscrip- 
tion ： ― " When  C/iin  Shih  Ibtany  Ti's  dies,  the  territory  will  be 
divided."  When  tlie  Emperor  heard  about  it,  he  ordered  the  cen- 
sors to  ask  the  people  one  by  one,  but  nobody  confessed.  Then 
all  persons  found  near  the  stone  were  seized  and  executed.7 

If  the  Emperor  executed  his  attendants  in  the  Palace  on  the 
Liang  Mountain  and  all  the  persons  near  the  stone,  he  destroyed 
tliem  all,  because  ho  wished  to  find  those  who  had  divulged  his 
words,  or  engraved  the  stone,  but  could  not  discover  them.  But 
what  had  the  village  of  C/muj  K'o  done  to  Ch'in  to  be  exterminated? 
If  the  King  of  C/i  in  had  been  stabbed  in  the  village,  and  the 
assailant  was  unknown,  there  might  liave  been  a  wholesale  exeim- 


1  A  State  in  Chili. 

*  Li  227  b.c.  Chinif  K'o  made  an  unsurccsafol  attempt  on  Ch'in  Shih  Huamj 
Ti's  life,  who  at  that  time  was  still  king  of  ( A  m.  It  waa  not  before  221  tliat, 
having  vanquished  all  the  rival  States,  he  assumed  the  imperial  title. 

3  All  tlie  ascendauits  and  deaccndanUt  from  the  great-great-grandfather  to  the 
great-great-grandson. 

*  A  mountain  in  the  province  of  Shetm. 
5  Quoted  from  Shi-chi  chap.  f!,  p.  24. 

fl  A  circuit  or  provinre  comprising  the  sonth  of  Chili. 
7  A  (juotation  from  ^/ii-rhi  chap. «»,  p.  25  v.    Cf.  p.  231. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations. 


493 


tion.  But  Ching  K'o  was  already  dead,  the  would-be-assassin  found, 
why  then  should  all  the  villagers  suffer  for  him? 

During  tlie  20th  year  of  Ch'in  Sfiih  Huang  IV s  reign  Ching 
K，o、  the  envoy  of  Yen,  attempted  to  assassinate  him,  but  the  King 
of  Ch'in  got  wind  of  it,  and  caused  Ching  K，o  to  be  torn  to  pieces 
as  a  warning.  There  is  no  mention  of  the  entire  destruction  of 
his  village.1  Perhaps  he  gave  orders  to  behead  the  nine  relations 
of  Ching  K'o.  If  these  were  many,  and  living  together  in  one 
hamlet,  this  hamlet  may  have  been  wiped  out  by  their  execution. 
People  fond  of  exaggerations  then  said:— "field  by  field." 


The  Shi-chi  doea  not  meutton  it. 


Digitized  by  Google 


494 


Lun  -  Hong :  E.  Critique. 


CHAPTER  XXXX. 
Exaggerations  of  the  Literati  {Ju-tseng). 

In  the  books  of  the  Literati  we  find  the  statement  that  the 
virtue  of  Yao  and  Shun  was  so  great  and  wonderful,  that  perfect 
peace  reigned  on  earth,  and  not  a  single  person  was  punislied  ； 
and  further  that,  since  WM  Wang  and  Wu  Wang  bequeathed  their 
greatness  to  Ch  eng  and  K  ang,1  tlic  instrumoiits  of  punishment  were 
laid  aside,  and  not  used  for  over  forty  years.2  The  itloa  is  to 
praise  Yao  and  '、'/"""  and  to  extol  Wht  Wang  and  Wu  Wang.  Without 
high-flown  words  one  deems  to  be  tumble  to  applaud  greatness, 
as  it  deserves,  and  witliout  some  figures  of  speech,  to  do  justice 
to  what  lias  been  achieved.  But  however  excellent  Yao  and  Shun 
have  been,  tliey  could  not  manage  that  nobody  was  punished,  and 
with  all  their  superiority  W^n  Waiig  and  Wu  Wang  could  not  do 
without  punishments.  That  there  were  few  oflencea  committed, 
and  punishments  seldom,  may  be  true.  But  that  nobody  was 
punished,  and  that  the  instruments  of  punishment  were  not  used, 
is  an  exaggeration. 

If  it  could  be  contrived,  that  nobody  was  punished,  it  could 
be  brought  about  also,  that  no  State  was  attacked.  If  the  in- 
struments of  punishment  were  put  aside  and  not  used,  arms  also 
could  be  laid  down,  and  would  not  be  required.  However,  Yao 
attacked  Tan-sfmi,3  and  S/tun  fought  against  the  Ytt  Miao*  Four 
nobles  had  to  submit.5  and  instruments  of  punisliment  as  well  as 
weapons  were  resorted  to.  At  the  time  of  Clieng  Wang  four  States 
rebelled:— Hie  Huai,  /,  IM、  and  Jungn  all  brought  misfortune  upon 
themselves.    To  punisli  a  man,  one  uses  a  sword,  to  exterminate 

1  ('h'vny  was  the  successoj;  of  King  Wu  Wuny.  He  reigned  from  1115-107K  b.c.， 
and  waa  sticceeded  by  K'ang  1078  1052. 
a  Cf.  chap.  4,  p.  17. 

3  A  place  in  Honan. 

4  The  aboriginal  Miao  tribes  which  exist  still  to-day. 

r'  Shun  hani.slied  h'ung  Kung,  JJuan  Ton,  the  prince  of  the  San  Jtfiao  and  h  'un. 
Cf.  Mtnciu»  V，  Pt.  II,  S  and  Shaking  Pt.  II，  I,  12. 

B  The  Huai,  /，  and  Jung  were  non-Chinese  tribes  ；  //*«  is  the  name  of  one 
of  the  Nine  Provinces  of 】•&  in  modem  Shantung. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


41)：) 


him,  arms.  The  puuishment  is  a  matter  of  criminal  law,  the  ex- 
termination of  fighting.  Figliting  and  criminal  law  do  not  differ, 
weapons  and  swords  are  the  same.  Even  an  able  dialectician  could 
not  discover  a  difference.  Against  depravity  arms  are  used,  against 
lawlessness  instruments  of  punishment.  These  latter  bear  the  same 
relation  to  weapons  as  feet  do  to  wings.  Walking,  one  uses  one's 
feet,  flying,  one's  wings.  Though  different  in  shape,  both  of  tliem 
equally  move  the  body :  in  the  same  manner  instruments  of  punish- 
ment and  weapons  combined  serve  to  cheok  the  evil.  Their  effect 
is  the  same. 

The  allegation  that  no  arms  were  used  implies  the  idea,  that 
no  penalties  were  inetod  out.  Should  a  man  with  defective  ears, 
but  intact  eyes  be  said  to  bv  in  possession  of  a  perfect  body,  we 
would  not  admit  that,  and  if  some  one  being  an  excellent  tiger- 
liunter,  but  afraid  of  striking  a  man,  were  called  brave  by  reason 
of  this  tiger-hunting  alone,  we  would  not  a^ree  to  it.  Only  in 
case  of  the  body  having  no  defects  and  tlie  courage  facing  whomso- 
ever, there  is  perfection.  Now,  they  say  that  nobody  was  punished, 
but  not  that  no  weapon  was  used.  Much  fuss  is  made  about  the 
fact,  that  instruments  of  pimisliinent  were  put  aside,  and  not  used, 
but  no  mention  made,  that  nobody  rebelled.  Therefore,  we  cannot 
speak  of  wonderful  virtue  or  greatness. 


The  books  of  the  Literati  tell  us  that  Yang  Yu  Chi 1  of  Clin 
was  very  remarkable  at  archery.  Shooting  at  an  aspon  leaf,  with 
a  hundred  shots  he  hit  it  a  hundred  times.  Tliis  is  of  course 
said  in  praise  of  his  brilliant  shooting.  That,  whenever  he  aimed 
at  an  aspen  leaf,  he  hit  it,  may  be  so,  but  to  say,  that  out  of  a 
hundred  shots  a  hundred  hit  tlu«  mark,  is  an  exaggeration. 

An  aspen  leaf  hit  by  an  arrow  over  and  over  again,  would 
soon  be  so  perforated,  that  it  could  no  more  serve  as  a  target. 
If  Yany  Yu  Chi  had  shot  at  an  iuipen  leaf,  as  it  was  banging  on 
the  tree,  he  would  always  have  hit  one,  thougli  not  that  which 
lie.  wanted,  there  being  su<:li  a  multitude  of  them.  Conse(juentIy 
he  would  bt'  obligwl  to  take  the  leaves  down,  and  place  them  one 
by  one  on  the  earth  to  shoot  at  tlu'in.  After  several  ten  shots, 
his  dexterity  would  have  been  sern.  The  spectators  would  all 
have  become  aware  oi'  his  skill  at  archery,  and  would  not  have 
required  a  hundred  shots. 


A  minister  of  the  ( 'Uu  State  in  the  ( 'ftou  epoch. 


Digitized  by  Google 


496 


Lun-Hfng:  E.  Critique. 


Narrators  are  fond  of  adorning  dexterity  and  other  accoraplisb- 
menta.  If  any  one  hit  thirty  and  more  times,  they  say  a  hundred. 
A  hundred  and  a  thousand  are  big  numbere.  Wishing  really  to  say 
ten,  they  say  a  hundred,  and  in  lieu  of  a  hundred,  a  thousand. 
The  meaning  is  the  same  as,  when  the  S/mkinff  speaks  of  the 
"harmony  of  the  ten  thousand  countries "  or  the  S/iitcing  of  the 
" thousand  and  hundred  thousand  descendants." 


We  learn  from  the  writings  of  the  Literati  that  there  was  a 
loyal  official  in  Wei:— Hung  Yen,  who  was  sent  abroad  as  envoy 
of  Duke  At  of  Wei. 1  Before  he  returned,  the  77 2  had  attacked, 
and  killed  the  duke,  and  eaten  liis  flesh,  leaving  only  the  liver. 
When  Hung  Yen  returned  from  his  mission,  he  reported  himself 
to  the  liver.  Out  of  sorrow,  that  Duke  At  liatl  died,  and  was 
eaten  up,  so  that  his  liver  had  no  resting-place,  he  took  a  knife, 
ripped  up  his  stomach,  took  all  its  contcuts  out,  put  the  liver 
of  Duke  At  in,  and  expired.  Those  telling  this  story  intend  to 
praise  his  loyalty.  It  is  possible  that  he  ripped  himself  open,  put 
Duke  Ai's  liver  in,  and  died.  To  say  that  he  took  out  all  the 
contents  of  the  stomach,  and  put  in  the  liver  of  Duke  Ai,  is  au 
exaggeration. 

If  people  stab  one  another  with  knives,  and  hit  the  Five 
Intestines,  they  die.  Why?  Because  the  Five  Intestines  regulate 
the  Vital  Fluid,  just  as  the  head  is  the  centre  of  all  the  arteries. 
When  the  head  has  been  cut  off,  the  hands  cannot  take  another 
man's  head,  and  put  it  on  the  neck.  How  then  should  Hung  Yen 
be  capable  of  first  emptying  his  own  stomach,  and  then  putting 
in  the  liver  of  Duke  Ai?  When  the  contents  of  the  stomach  have 
been  taken  out,  death  ensues.  Then  tlie  liaiuls  cau  no  more  grasp. 
If  lie  first  put  in  the  liver  of  Duke  Ai,  and  then  took  out  tlie 
contents  of  the  stomach,  then  it  ought  to  be  said,  that  he  put  in 
the  liver  of  Duke  Ai,  and  emptied  his  stomach.  But  now  it  is 
first  mention«>(l  tliat  the  contents  of  tlie  stomacli  were  completely 
taken  out,  and  that  the  liver  of  Duke  Ai  was  put  in,  which  is  a  gross 
exaggeration  of  truth. 


1  This  must  be  a  misprint,  for  no  Duke  of  this  name  is  known.  The  Li  thih 
eh'tm  ch'iu,  wliicli  mentions  the  story,  speaks  of  Duke  I  of  WW,  667-659  b.c. 
*  The  nortJieni  barbarians. 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


-11)7 


We  read  in  the  books  of  Literati,  that,  when  Hsiung  Ch'n  Tse 1 
of  Ch'u  once  went  out,  he  saw  a  atone  lying  ou  the  ground,  which 
he  took  for  a  crouching  tiger.  He  grasped  liis  bow,  and  shot  at 
it.  The  arrow  disappeared  up  to  the  leathers.2  Others  relate  that 
Yang  Yu  C7«»s  saw  a  stone  stretched  like  a  rhinoceros.  He  shot  at 
it,  and  the  arrow  was  absorbed  with  the  plumes.  Some  hold  that 
Hsiung  Cfifl  Tse  is  Li  Kuang.A  Yang  Yu  Chi  and  Li  h'uang  must  give 
their  names,  and  one  does  not  discover,  that  the  atory  is  not  true. 

Some  speak  of  a  tiger,  some  of  a  rhinoceros.  Both  being 
fierce  animals,  it  amounts  to  tlie  same.  Some  say,  that  the  feathers 
disappeared,  some,  that  the  plumes  were  absorbed.  Plumes  are 
feathers,  only  the  word'mg  is  a  little  different.  The  chief  idea  is 
that  a  stone  resembled  a  tiger  or  a  rhinoceros,  and  that  out  of 
fright  the  arrow  was  shot  with  such  force,  that  it  entered  deep. 
One  may  say,  that  a  stouc  reaeiubled  a  tiger,  and  that,  when  shot 
at,  the  arrow  entered  deep.  But  to  maintain  that  it  disappeared 
up  to  the  feathers  is  going  too  far.  Seeing  something  like  a  tiger, 
one  regards  it  as  such,  draws  the  bow,  and  shoots  at  it  with  the 
utmost  force  and  energy.  The  aspect  of  a  real  tiger  would  have 
quite  the  same  effect.  Upon  shooting  a  stone  resembling  a  tiger  the 
arrow  should  enter  30  completely,  that  nothing  of  the  feathers 
could  be  seen.  Would  then,  when  hitting  a  real  tiger,  the  arrow- 
pass  straight  through  its  body?  It  is  difficult  to  pierce  a  stone, 
whereas  with  flesh  it  is  very  easy.  If  the  feathers  vanished  in  a 
substance  difficult  to  be  pierced,  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  an 
arrow  must  traverse  a  stuff  aflbrding  110  obstacle. 

A  good  marksman  can  shoot  at  great  distances,  and  hit  the 
smallest  object,  not  missing  one  line.  But  how  could  he  give 
greater  force  to  the  bow  or  the  cross-bow  ?  Yang  Yu  Chi  shut  at 
the  Marquis  of  Chin  iu  a  battle,  aud  hit  him  in  the  eye.5  A  com- 
moner aiming  at  a  ruler  of  ten  titousand  chariots  would  certainly 
strain  his  nerves  to  the  utmost,  and  double  his  forces,  not  less 

1  Hsiung  Chu  Tse  lived  during  the  Chou  dynasty. 
a  This  story  is  told  in  the  H«in-hm  of  Liu  Hsiaruf. 
， Cf.  above  p.  495. 

*  A  general  of  Han  Wu  Ti，  cf.  p.  168. 

»  The  Tao-chmn,  Duke  C'AVny  1 6th  year  {Lcgge,  Claries  Vol.  V,  Pt.I,  p.  397) 
informs  us  that  iu  a  battle  fought  by  the  Marquis  of  Chin  against  King  Kuny  of 
Ch'u  in  574  b.c.  /  of  LH,  an  archer  of  Chin,  shot  at  King  A'uny  of  Ch'u  and  hit  him 
in  the  oye.  The  king  thereupon  ordered  his  own  archer,  Yang 】'u  Chi,  to  revenge 
him,  handing  him  two  arrows.    With  the  first  arrow  Yanff  Yu  Chi  killed  I. 

According  to  this  account  it  was  not  the  Marquia  of  Chin,  who  was  hit  in  the 
eye,  but  the  King  of  Ch'u,  and  not  Yang 】'u  Chi  shot  the  arrow,  but  1  of  Lit. 

Lun-Heng.  32 


Digitized  by  Google 


498 


Lun-Heng:  K.  Critique. 


than,  when  shooting  at  the  stone.  Could  then  the  arrow  bitting 
the  eye  of  the  Marquis  pass  through  to  the  neck?  If  it  bad  done, 
the  Marquis  of  Chin  would  have  died  on  bis  chariot. 

1  presume  that  an  arrow  projected  from  a  ten  stones  ballista,1 
would  not  eutor  one  inch  into  a  stoue,  and  split  into  three  pieces. 
Now,  should  a  weak  bow  be  drawn  with  human  force,  how  could 
the  feathers  disappear  iu  the  stone,  though  the  bowman  usod  all 
his  strength  ？ 

Human  energy  is  a  fluid,  aud  this  fluid  a  force.  When  in 
distress  of  fire  or  water  people  are  very  fluttered  and  frightened, 
aud  carry  away  their  belongings,  their  energies  reach  their  maximum. 
If,  at  ordinary  times,  they  could  carry  one  picul,  they  then  carry  two. 
Now,  provided  that,  when  shooting  at  the  stretched  out  stone,  the 
energy  is  doubled,  the  arrow  nevertheless  could  not  enter  deeper  than 
one  inch.   The  disappearance  of  the  feathers  is  out  of  the  question. 

Let  is  suppose  that  a  good  8\vordsmaiJ  beholds  a  stone  lying 
on  the  ground,  geta  frightened,  ami  strikes  it.  Could  he  cut  it 
asunder?  Or  let  a  brave  man,  who  would  tackle  a  tiger  with  his  ud- 
armeil  fist,  unexpectedly  catch  sight  of  hucIi  a  stone,  and  hammer 
down  on  it  with  his  hand.   Would  lie  leave  any  trace  on  the  stone? 

The  strength  of  clevor  people  is  equal  to  that  of  the  stupid, 
the  earnestness  of  purpose  of  the  ancients  like  that  of  the  moderns. 
If  now-a-ilays  an  archer  shoots  animals  and  birds  in  the  country, 
lie  spares  no  force  to  get  ihem.  Yet,  when  lie  liits  an  auiinal, 
the  blow  enters  only  some  inclit'8.  If  it  slips  and  liits  a  stone, 
t)ie  sharp  point  (Iocs  uot  enter,  and  the  arrow  breaks  to  pieces. 
Accordingly  the  statements  in  the  books  of  the  Literati  to  the 
effect  tliat  llsiuug  C/tii  Tse  of  C7<  «,  Yang  Yu  Chi,  and  Li  Kuauy  shot 
at  a  stone  lying  on  the  ground,  and  that  tho  arrow  disappeared 
up  to  the  feathers,  or  was  engulfed  togetlicr  with  the  plumes, 
are  all  exaggerationa. 

In  the  writings  of  the  Literati  we  find  the  notice  that  Lu 
Hma  was  as  skilful  as  Mi  Tse.3  From  wood  he  carved  a  kite,  which 

' The  force  of  a  bow,  a  cross-bow,  or  a  ballista  is  measured  by  the  weight 
required  to  draw  them. 

One  stone  or  one  picul  !n  ancient  times  amounted  to  120  pounds. 

2  A  celebrated  mechanic  of  the  Lu  State,  who  lived  coiitemporaneoasly  with 
('onfucius.  Lu  Pan  is  hU  sobriquet,  liLs  proper  name  l>eing  Kung  Shu  Tsc  He  has 
become  the  tutelary  god  of  artisans. 

H  The  philosophor  .W  Ti  lias  l>eeu  credited  with  mechanical  skill,  erroneously 
I  presume. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


490 


could  fly  three  days  without  coming  down.  It  may  be,  that  he 
made  a  kite  of  wood,  which  he  flew.  But  that  it  did  not  alight 
for  three  days,  is  an  exaggeration.  If  he  carved  it  from  wood,  he 
gave  it  tlie  shape  of  a  bird.  How  then  could  it  fly  without  resting? 
If  it  could  soar  up,  why  did  it  do  so  just  three  days?  Provided 
there  was  a  mechanism,  by  which,  once  set  in  motion,  it  continued 
flying,  it  could  not  have  come  down  again.  Then  people  ought  to 
say  that  it  flew  continually,  and  not  three  days. 

There  is  a  report  that  Lu  Pan  by  his  skill  lost  his  mother. 
That  is  to  say,  the  clever  artisan  had  constructed  a  wooden  car- 
riage and  horses  with  a  wooden  charioteer  for  his  mother.  When 
the  mechanism  was  complete,  he  put  his  mother  in  the  carriage, 
which  drove  off  to  return  no  more.  And  thus  he  lost  his  mother. 
Provided  the  mechanism  in  the  wooden  kite  wa«  in  order,  it  must 
have  been  like  that  of  the  wooden  carriage  and  liorses.  Then  it 
would  have  continued  flying  without  rest.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
mechanism  works  but  for  a  short  while,  therefore  the  kite  could 
not  have  continued  flying  much  longer  than  three  (lays.  Then  the 
same  holds  good  with  regard  to  the  wooden  carriage,  it  also  ought 
to  have  stopped  after  three  days  on  the  road,  and  rould  not  go 
straight  on,  so  that  the  mother  waa  lost.  Both  stories  arc  ap- 
parently uutrustwortliy. 


In  some  books  the  statement  is  made  that  Confucius  had  no 
resting-place  in  this  world.  Wandering  about  he  visited  over  seventy 
States,  where  he  attempted  to  gain  inlluence,  but  nowhere  \w  found 
repose.  One  may  well  say,  that  he  wandered  about,  and  found 
nothing,  but  to  say,  that  he  (； a  me  to  seventy  States,  is  going  too 
far.  According  to  the  Analects  and  the  works  of  otlier  philosophers 
he  returned  from  Wei 1  to  Lu.  In  C/i'm2  liis  nupplies  wen*  exhausted, 
in  Wei  his  traces  were  obliterated.3  He  Forgot  the  taste  of  food  in 
(Jfii,*  a  tree  was  felled  over  liim  in  Sung,&  iiml  besides  there  aro 


1  A  State  in  northern  lionan. 

a  A  State  comprising  the  southern  part  of  Honan. 
s  Cf.  p.  155. 

4  "  When  the  Master  was  in  Ch'i,  he  heard  tlie  Shao  masic,  and  for  three 
months  lie  did  not  know  the  tasto  of  flesh,"  so  engrossed  was  he  was  ttiia  music, 
that  he  did  not  taste  what  he  ate  (Legge,  Anoleett  p.  199；  Analects  VII,  13). 

5  The  emissaries  of  u  higli  uffioer  of  Sung  tried  to  kill  (  onfaciu.^  by  pulling 
down  Uie  tree  under  which  he  waa  practising  ceremonies.  Cf.  Legye,  AnaUcU  p.  202 
Note  22. 

32* 


Digitized  by  Google 


f)0() 


Lnn-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


Pi、  Tun,2  and  Mou.s  These  States,  which  he  visited,  do  not  even 
amount  to  ten.  The  statement  about  seventy  States  is  therefore 
unreliable.  Perhaps  he  weut  to  more  than  ten  States.  Then  the 
report  about  seventy  States  was  spread  in  books,  and  people  now 
talk  of  seventy  States. 

We  read  in  the  Analects*  that  Confucius  asked  Kung  Ming  Chia 
about  Kung  Shu  Win  Tseh  saying,  "  Is  it  true  that  your  master  does 
not  speak,  nor  laugli,  nor  take  anything?  "—Awn^r  Ming  Chia  replied, 
" That  is  a  misrepresentation.  The  Master  speaks,  when  it  is  time, 
and  people  do  not  dislike  his  words.  He  lauglis,  when  lie  is  merry, 
and  people  are  not  displeased  witli  liis  laugh.  He  takes  things, 
when  he  has  a  right  to  do  so,  and  people  are  not  dissatisfied." 
Confucius  exclaimed,  44  How  is  it  possible ！  How  is  it  possible! " 
In  fact  Kung  Shu  VVV/j  Tae  spoke  at  the  proper  time,  laughed  when 
pleased,  and  took  what  he  was  entitled  to.  Out  of  this  fact,  which 
became  known,  people  made  the  story  that  Kung  Shu  WM  Tse  did 
neither  speak,  nor  laugh,  nor  take  anything.  When  commou  people 
tell  a  thing,  they  always  like  to  overdo  it. 


We  read  in  some  books  that  when  Duke  Mu  of  Ch  in 9  in- 
vested CJUitg.  lie.  passed  tlirougli  Chin  without  borrowing  a  passage. 
Duke  Ilsiany  of  Chin 7  therefore  inteudetl  to  strike  a  blow  at  liini 
with  the  help  of  the  Chiang  Jung 8  in  the  Yao  passes.9  When  no 
horses  nor  carriages  came  back,  C/tin  sent  out  three  high  officers: 
Ming  Ming  Shih,  llsi  Clii  Shu，  and  Po  Yi  Ping,  who  all  returned.  Since 
they  came  back,  tlie  horees  and  carriages  must  have  come  back 


likewi 


se.   The  report  to  the  contrary  is  au  exaggeration. 10 


A  city  in  southern  Shantung. 
A  territory  in  Ch'en. 
A  princedom  in  Shantung. 
Analects  XIV,  14. 

Kung  Shu  Wt'n  T«e  was  a  higli  officer  in  the  State  of  Wei,  and  Kung  Ming 
Chia  would  seem  to  have  been  his  disciple. 
658-619  b.c. 
626-619  b.c. 
Western  barbarians. 

A  dangerous  defile  ui  the  district  of  Yimg-ning,  llonan. 
According  to  tlie  Ch'un-ch'iu,  Duke  Hsi  33d  year,  tlie  army  of  Chin  was 
defeated  at  Vau  in  G2G  h.c.  The  Tso-chuan  narrates  the  campaign  in  detail,  ajid 
relates  that  the  three  officers  wore  first  taken  prisoners,  but  afterwards  released  by 
the  intercession  of  the  mother  of  the  Duke  of  Chin,  wlio  vtas  a  priucea*  of  ihe 
ducal  house  of  Ch'in. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


We  are  told  in  several  books  that  the  Princes  of  Mhxg  CKang  in 
Ch  i, 1  Ilsin  Ling  ill  Wet,  P  ing  Yuan  in  Chao,  and  Ch  xm  Sh^n  in  Ch'n2 
treated  their  retainers  with  great  kindness,  and  attracted  them  from 
everywhere,  each  3000  men.  Tliis  is  meant  to  illustrate  their  kindness 
aud  the  great  conflux.  That  the  number  of  retainers  was  very 
great,  is  possible,  but  that  they  amounted  to  3000，'  an  exaggeration. 
For,  although  the  four  princes  had  a  partiality  for  retainers,  and 
though  the  latter  assembled  in  gre^t  numbers,  yet  each  one  could 
not  have  more  than  about  a  thousand.  Then  the  books  made  it 
three  thousand.  For  a  great  many,  people  will  say  a  thousand,  and 
in  case  of  a  small  number,  not  a  single  one.  That  is  the  common 
practice,  and  thus  misstatements  originate. 


There  is  a  tradition,  that  Kan  Tse  Koo3  mourning  his  father, 
shed  bloody  tears,  and  that  for  three  years  he  did  not  show  his  teetli. 
To  an  honest  man  tliis  would  seem  to  be  ratlier  difficult; 4  for 
it  is  not  easily  done.  He  would  not  consider  it  untrue,  but  only 
difficult,  and  therein  he  is  mistaken. 

That  Kao  Tse  shed  bloody  tears,  is  probably  true.  Ho  of  Chingh 
offered  a  precious  stone  to  the  Prince  of  Ch  m,  wlio  cut  off  his  foot. 
Distressed  that  his  jewel  did  not  tiud  favour,  and  that  his  feelings 
were  not  appreciated  he  wej»t,  until  his  tears  were  dried  up,  when 
he  continued  weeping  with  tears  of  blood.  Now  Kao  Tse  bewailed 
the  death  of  his  father.  His  grief  was  extreme.  It  must  be  true 
that,  when  his  tears  ceased,  blood  came  out,  but  the  saying  that 
for  three  years  he  did  not  show  his  teeth,  is  au  exaggeration. 

These  words  mean  that  Kao  Tse  did  not  speak  nor  laugh. 
That  a  filial  son,  while  mourning  his  parents,  should  not  laugh, 
is  only  natural,  but  how  can  he  avoid  speaking,  and  when  speaking, 
avoid  showing  his  teeth  ？ 

Confucius  said :  "  What  he  said,  was  not  elegant,  and  at  times 
he  did  not  speak  at  all."  Then  it  was  reported,  that  he  did  not 
show  his  teeth,  or  even,  that  for  three  years  he  did  not  show  his 


i  Cf.  p.  161. 

， These  four  princes  are  known  as  the  "  Four  Heroes,"  living  at  the  end  of 
the  Chou  epoch,  during  the  time  of  the  "  Contending  States,"'  the  3rd  century  b.c. 
*  Kao  Ch'ai  or  Kao  T«e  Kao,  w&s  a  disciple  otConfuciuM,  noted  for  his  filial  piety. 
4  Quotation  from  the  Li-ki,  Tan  Kung  Sect.  I，  II,  14. 

1  Ho  of  Ching  '••  t.  of  Ch'u,  known  as  I*ien  Ho  viz  Ho  of  the  Pien  district. 
Cf.  p.  113. 


Digitized  by  Google 


502 


I.un-II^ng:  K.  Critic|ae. 


teeth.  Kao  Tmng 1  while  in  the  mourning  slied  did  not  speak  for 
three  years.3  He  enjoyed  imperial  majesty.  That  he  did  not  speak 
means  to  say,  that  he  did  not  use  elegant  expressions,  and  even 
that  seems  doubtful,  and  is  perhaps  an  exaggeration.  On  the  other 
hand  Kao  Tse  Kao  held  a  very  humble  position,  yet  he  is  believed 
not  to  have  shown  his  teeth,  which  is  certainly  still  more  ex- 
aggerated. 


The  Literati  write  in  their  books  that  Ch'in  list  recommended 
Po  Li  Hsi  to  Duke  Mu 3  who,  however,  did  not  pay  attention  to  it. 
Then  Ch'in  Hsi  went  out  of  the  front  door,  bowed  down  his  head, 
and  knocked  it  on  the  ground,  so  that  it  broke  to  pieces,  and  died. 
This  affected  Duke  Mu  so  deeply,  tliat  he  took  Po  Li  Hsi  into  his 
service.  Tlie  meaning  of  this  story  is  that  a  worthy  in  recommend- 
ing a  good  man  did  not  spare  his  own  life,  knocking  his  head  on 
the  ground,  that  it  broke,  and  died,  all  witli  tlie  object  to  further 
his  friend. 

With  tliis  story  scholars  use  to  exhort  one  another,  and  it  is 
handed  down  in  tlieir  books.  Nobody  discredits  it.  That  some- 
body kotows,  while  rocoinniending  a  good  man,  has  happened  of 
old,  as  it  happens  now.  It  is  true  tliat  Chin  I  hi  knocked  his  head, 
hut  the  allegation  that  lie  broke  it,  and  expired  is  an  exaggeration. 

When  a  man  kotows,  that  his  head  aches,  and  the  blood  comes 
out,  ho  cannot  fracture  his  skull,  liowever  angry  and  agitated  lie 
may  be.  I  do  not  maintain,  that  the  skull  cannot  be  broken,  but 
man  lias  not  suflicient  strength  to  do  it  alone.  With  a  knife  one 
may  cut  one's  throat,  or  with  a  l)lado  pierce  one's  bosom.  By 
means  of  the  knife  or  the  blade  the  hand  acquires  the  necessary 
strcnjjth.  II'  Cli  in  I  hi  liad  taken  a  liammer,  and  smashed  his  skull, 
ther«  would  bt»  notl»in«"  wonderful  in  it.  To  1'all  down,  and  sinasli 
his  skull  ('/t  in  list  would  not  have  had  the  necessary  strength. 
There  have  been  poo[)le  who  died  while  prostrating  themselves, 
but  nono  Avho  l)rok<-  their  heads  on  smashed  tlieir  skulls.  Perhaps 
C'/i  in  Hsi  pcrlornuHl  the  kotow,  while  recommending  Po  Li  Hsi, 
which  pave  rise  to  the  story  of  his  death,  or  \\c  really  died,  while 
kotowing,  hence  the  idle  talk  of  people  that  he  broke  his  head. 

1  Posthumous  title  of  the  S/innp  emperor  Wu  Ting.    See  p.  328. 

2  Quoted  from  the  Shukin9,  \Vu  )i  Pt.  V,  Bk.  XV,  5  (Ly9e  Vol.  UI,  Pull, 
p.  4<；6). 

•  Duke  Mu  of  <  h'in,  658  619  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Ut«rati. 


503 


The  bonks  ol"  the  Literati  tell  us  tliat  for  the  Prince  of  Ym, 
Ching  K'o  attempted  to  assassinate  the  King  of  Cli  in.  He  struck 
him  with  a  stiletto,  but  did  not  hit.  The  King  of  Ch'lu  then  drew 
his  sword  and  stnurk  him.  When  Ching  K'o  assaulted  tlie  King  of 
Cli  iii  with  a  stiletto,  he  did  not  hit  his  adversary,  but  a  copper 
pillar,  into  whicli  the  dagger  entered  a  foot  deep.  With  these 
words  one  wishes  to  emphasize  the  sharpness  of  the  stiletto. 

Citing  K'o  was  a  powerful  man.  He  thrust  tl"'  sharp  blade, 
so  that  it  penetrated  into  the  hard  pillar.  In  order  to  exalt  Ching 
A'oV  courage  people  liave  coloured  the  roal  facts.  It  is  true  that 
the  stiletto  went  into  tlie  copper  pillar,  but  the  assertion  that  it 
entered  a  foot  deep,  is  an  exaggeration,  for,  although  copper  does 
not  possess  the  hardness  of  a  dagger,  the  latter  canuot  penetrate 
deeper  than  some  inches,  but  not  one  foot. 

Let  us  consider  thi;  question,  in  case  he  had  Iiit  the  King  of 
Ch'iu,  would  he  have  run  (lie  dagger  through  him?  Pulling  a  ten 
stones  bailista  with  a  windlass  and  shooting  at  a  wooden  target  in 
a  wall,  one  would  not  perforate  it  to  the  extent  of  one  foot.  With 
force  of  hand  L'king  K'o  thrust  a  small  stiletto.  While  he  himself 
was  struck  by  tlie  TMity-t/uan  sword,'  the  da^^er  entered  into  tlio 
hard  copper  pillar.2  Then  Chiwj  K  os  force  was  stronger  than  that 

1  A  famous  sword  forged  by  Ou  Yeh  and  Kan  CMam/,  in  later  times  a  term 
for  a  good  blade  in  general.    Cf.  p.  377. 

9  The  Shi-chi  chap.  86,  p.  10  v.  gives  us  a  graphic  description  of  the  assault 
of  dhing  K'o  on  Shih  lluamj  Ti.  When  at  a  reception  the  en\v>y  of  Ym  presented  a 
map  to  the  king,  tlie  latter  caught  sight  of  the  dagger,  whicli  ( 'king  K'o  tiad  concealed. 
Then  Ching  K'o  "  with  liis  left  hand  grasped  the  sleeve  i>f  tlie  King  of  f  A  in,  and 
with  his  rijitit  hand  the  dagger,  and  was  going  to  strike  the  kinji.  but,  before  he 
tonched  his  body,  the  king  friglitened,  retreated,  and  rose,  tearing  off  his  sleeve. 
He  tried  to  draw  his  sword,  but  the  sword  was  very  long,  and  while  engaged  with 
the  scabbard,  he  was  so  excited,  and  tlio  sword  was  so  hard,  that  he  could  not  draw 
it  out  at  the  moment.  ( 'hing  JCo  chased  the  king,  wlio  ran  round  a  pillar.  The 
assembled  officers  were  tliiuidorstruck.  Tlie.v  all  rose  in  a  body,  but  were  so  much 
taken  by  surprise,  tliat  tliey  conipletelv  lost  their  heads.  By  the  rules  of  ( 'h'in  the 
officers,  waiting  upon  the  king  in  the  palace  hall,  were  not  allowed  to  carry  the 
smallest  weapon  with  them  The  armed  guards  were  all  stationed  below  the  liall, 
but,  witiiout  a  special  order,  tliey  were  not  permitted  to  walk  up.  At  tlie  critical 
iiiotiient  there  was  no  time  to  summon  the  soldiers  below.  Tin's  is  the  reason,  why 
Chmg  K'o  could  pursue  tlie  kitig,  and  that  \\\h  attendants,  though  startled,  did  not 
strike  tlie  assailant.  Tliey  all  .seized  liim  with  their  hand.s.  however,  and  the  royal 
plivsioian  H/tia  Wu  Chu  flung  his  medicine  bag,  which  he  was  presenting,  against  him. 
While  the  King  of  Ch  in  was  tlius  fleeing  round  ihc  pillar,  all  were  alarmed,  but  did 
not  know  what  to  do.  Tlie  attendants  only  slioutcd,  4  Push  your  sword  backwards, 
King!  Pusli  your  mvcm'(I  hack  wards  ！  '  Tlio  king  then  drew  hi.s  sword,  and  hit  Ching 
K'o,  cutting  liis  left  l«、g.    Ch!ng  K'o  maimed  then  lifunl  \\\s  dagger  and  thrust  it  at 


Digitized  by  Google 


504 


Lun-H^ng:  E.  Critique. 


of  the  ton  stones  ballista,  and  the  copper  pillar  softer  than  the 
wooden  target.  丁 he  courage  of  Ching  K'o  is  made  much  of,  but 
tliere  is  no  mention  that  lie  possessed  great  strength.  Of  strong 
men  tliere  is  none  like  M^ng  Pin.  Would  Ming  Pen,  if  he  bad  struck 
a  copper  pillar,  have  cut  it  one  foot  deep?  Perhaps  the  stiletto 
was  as  sharp  an  the  famous  swords  Kan-chiang  and  Mo-ya, 1  whose 
tlirusts  and  blows  nothing  could  withstand,  and  that  therefore  it 
really  penetrated  one  foot  deep.  Unfortunately  the  praise  bestowed 
on  Kan-chiang  and  Mo-ija  also  overshoot  the  mark,  and  are  much 
akin  to  the  foot  deep  cutting  of  the  copper  pillar. 


We  learn  from  the  works  of  the  Literati  that  Tung  Chung  Shu2 
while  reading  the  Ch  un-ch  iu  was  so  absorbed  in  his  study,  that 
he  did  not  think  of  anything  else,  and  for  three  years  did  not 
cast  a  look  at  the  greens  in  the  garden.  That  he  did  not  look  at 
the  greens  in  the  garden  may  be  true,  but  the  three  years  are  an 
exaggeration.  Although  Tung  Chung  Shu  was  very  industrious,  yet 
\w  must  have  relaxed  from  time  to  time,  and  at  such  moments  he 
also  would  liave  sauntered  a  I  tout  his  court-yard.  Strolling  out  into 
the  court-yard,  why  should  he  have  disdained  to  gaze  at  the  greens 
in  the  garden  ？ 

1  havo  heard  that  persons  engrossed  in  some  idea,  and  study- 
ing some  question,  do  not  appear  in  public,  and  that  for  a  principle 
some  have  lost,  their  lives,  but  I  never  heard,  that  they  did  not 
go  into  the  rourt-yard,  and  were  sitting  rapt  in  thoughts  for  three 
years,  without  ever  looking  at  tlie  garden.  In  the  Wu-t/i  Chapter 
of  tlie  Shtk;"g  it  is  said  that  the  good  man  does  not  find  repose, 
because  he  foresees  the  troubles  of  the  harvest.3  If  he  reposes  never- 
theless, it  is  because  nerves  aud  bones  are  not  of  wood  or 
stone,  and  must  be  unstrung  from  time  to  time.  Hence  WM  Wang 
never  strained  his  nerves  without  slackening  thera  again,  nor  did 

tlie  king,  but  missed  him,  and  instead  hit  the  copper  pillar.  Tlien  the  Ring  of  Chin 
dealt  hitn  another  blow,  and  thus  ( 'king  K'o  received  eight  wounds.  Seeing  that  his 
.scheme  had  failed,  he  l，，aiit  against  the  pillar.  Weeping,  he  squatted  down,  and 
said   At  that  momeiit  the  attendants  came  forward,  and  killed  Ching  JCo." 

1  Two  swords  wrought  by  the  noted  sword-cutler  h'an  Chiang  for  Ho  Lu^ 
king  of  Wu  hl'.i  4f4  B.r.  Mo-ya  was  the  name  of  his  wife.  The  Kan-chiang  sword 
was  regarded  as  ttie  male,  the  Mo-ya  aa  the  female  sword. 

， An  author  of  the  2nd  century  b.c. 

»  Quota 卜山 from  the  Shuking,  W"-y,  Pt.  V,  Hk.  XV,  1  {Legge  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  II, 
p.  464). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


he  slacken  without  subsequent  straining.  An  interchange  of  activity 
and  passivity  was  in  his  eyes  the  right  thing.  If  even  tho  brilliant 
mental  faculties  of  the  Sages  had  to  relax  after  an  effort,  Tung 
Chwig  Sfm,  whose  strength  was  much  less  than  that  of  those  men, 
nould  not  well  concentrate  his  thoughts  for  three  years  without 
cepoae. 


The  books  of  the  Literati  contain  a  statement  to  the  effect 
that  at  the  time  when  the  Hsia  Dynasty  had  reached  it«  prime, 
distant  countries  sent  pictures  of  their  products,  and  the  nine  pro- 
vinces metal  as  tribute.  From  this  tripods  were  cast,  on  which  all 
kinds  of  objects  were  represented.  The  consequence  was,  that, 
when  people  went  into  forests  or  to  lakes,  they  did  not  meet 
spectres,  and  they  could  thereby  ward  off  the  influences  of  evil 
spirits.  The  Emperor  and  his  subjects  being  in  harmony,  heaven 
gave  its  protection.1 

Metal  is  by  nature  a  thing.  The  tribute  metal  from  distant 
places  was  thought  very  beautiful,  and  therefore  cast  into  tripods, 
on  which  all  sorts  of  curious  objects  were  depicted.  How  could 
this  have  tlie  effect  that  people  in  forests  or  by  lakes  did  not 
meet  with  spectres,  and  could  ward  off  the  evil  influences  of  spirits? 
During  the  Chou  time  there  was  universal  peace.  The  Yileh-shang 2 
offered  white  pheasants  to  the  court,  the  Japanese 3  odoriferous 
plants.  Since  by  eating  these  wliite  pheasants  or  odoriferous  plants 
one  cannot  keep  free  from  evil  influences,  why  should  vessels  like 
bronze  tripods  have  such  a  power? 

The  appearance  of  the  Nine  Tripods  was  an  auspicious  sign 
of  high  virtue.4  Yet  the  wearing  of  a  felicitous  object  does  not 
attract  happiness.  Boys  use  to  wear  jade-stones,  girls  pearls,  yet 
neither  pearls  nor  jewels  can  guard  mankind  against  evil.  Precious 
and  rare  things  are  used  as  excellent  charms  and  amulets,  and 
they  are  regarded  by  some  as  very  useful.  The  same  is  maintained 
in  regard  to  the  Nine  Tripods.    They  cannot  ward  off  evil  in- 


1  Abridged  from  the  Tw-chuan,  Duke  H-iuan  3rd  year. ― From  the  IlMa  dynasty 
these  tripods  came  down  to  the  Sliang  and  the  Chou  dynasties,  and  in  605  b.c.  were 
still  in  existence. 

2  A  people  in  the  8oatheni  part  of  Kuang-tung  province,  near  the  Annamew 
frontier. 

3  The  Wo,  an  old  name  for  the  Japanese,  which  Chinese  authors  have  ex- 
plained to  mean  "  Pygmies." 

*  The  virtue  of  the  Emperor  1«. 


Digitized  by  Google 


50(> 


Lun-  Heng:  E.  Critique. 


fluences,  the  report  to  the  contrary  is  an  exaggerated  statcinent  in 
the  afore-incntioned  books. 

There  is  a  popular  tradition  that  the  tripods  of  C/tou  boiled 
of  tliemselves  without  fire,  aud  that  tilings  could  be  taken  out  of 
them,  which  liad  not  been  put  in.  That  is  a  popular  exaggeratiou. 
According  to  the  exaggerated  statement  in  tlie  books  of  tlie  Literati 
the  Nine  Tripods,  having  nothing  peculiar,  would  possess  super- 
natural powers  without  any  reason. 

What  proof  would  there  be  for  this  assertion?  The  metal 
of  the  Choti  tripods  came  from  afar  as  tribute.  Yii  obtained  it  and 
caused  it  to  be  wrought  into  tripods.  On  tlie  tripods  a  great  many 
things  were  represented.  If  as  a  tribute  from  distant  lands  they 
were  spiritual,  why  should  tilings  from  distant  countries  be  spiritual? 
If  they  were  so,  because  Yil  cast  them,  Yil  himself,  though  a  Sage, 
could  not  be  a  spirit,  how  then  should  cast  vessels  be?  If  tliey 
were,  because  they  were  made  of  metal,  metal  is  like  stone,  but 
stone  cannot  be  spiritual,  why  then  should  metal  be?  If  they 
were  spirits,  because  they  were  covered  with  pictures  of  all  kinds 
of  things,  these  pictures  are  like  the  liglitning  of  the  Thunder 
Goblet.1  On  this  goblet  were  carved  clouds  and  thunder.  They 
are  in  the  sky  and  much  more  spiritual  tliau  ordinary  things.  Since 
tlie  representations  of  clouds  and  lightning  are  not  spirits,  tlie  pict- 
ures of  various  things  cannot  be  either. 


It  \h  on  rc<'ord  that,  when  Ch'in  extinguished  C/iou,  the  Nine 
Tripods  of  Chou  foil  into  the  jiower  of  C/i  in.  In  fact,  during  the 
reign  of  King  AV〃'，'-'  King  Cl"w  ol'  (.'7<V,'3  sent  liis  general  ('hiu  to 
attack  Nnn  Wang.  The  latter  terrified,  hastened  to  ('Win.  pro- 
stratrd  liimscll',  confessed  his  guilt,  mu]  reded  all  his  citiea,  3(5  with 
30,<K )0  souls.  Cliin  accepted  the  j^if't,  and  allowed  King  Nan  to  po 
homo.  At  his  death  the  king  of  C/i  in  seized  tlie  Nine  Tripods 
and  other  precious  utensils.4  Thus  the  tripods  came  to  be  in  67/  rw.5 
In  the  28tli  year  of  his  reign  Ch  in  S/ti/i  Huang  Ti  travelled  north- 


1   A  sacrificial  vessel  used  during  the  Hsia  dynasty. 
M14  255  b.c. 

s  3<Kt-249  b.c.    Tiio  full  name  of  this  king  is  ( 'hao  Ilsianp. 
4  Cf.  tlie  parallel  passage  in  Shi-chi  chap.  4,  p.  3!)  where,  however,  not  Aan 
^Yf'nff,  but  tlie  Prince  of  the  E.istcrn  C/tou  submits  to  (  h'in  and  cedes  his  territory. 

In  '：."»：)  u.c.     V,'/.  Slu-Ui  ol.iip.  L'S,  p.  S. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Exaggerations  of  the  Literati. 


507 


ward  to  iMng-yeh. 1  On  his  return  lie  passed  P^ng-clting,2  and  by 
feasting  prepared  himself  for  a  sacrifice.  Wishing  to  get  the  Tripods 
of  Chou  out,  he  sent  a  thousand  men  to  plunge  into  the  Sse  River,3 
but "  all  searching  was  in  vain.4 

Chf in  S/1U1  Huang  Ti  came  three  generations  after  King  CItao. 
At  that  time  there  was  neither  disorder  nor  rebellion  in  C/thi,  and 
the  tripods  ought  not  to  have  disappeared.  That  they  might  have 
done  perhaps  during  the  Chou  time.  The  report  says  that  King  Nan 
hurried  to  Ch'in,  and  that  Ch'in  seized  the  Nine  Tripods.  Perhaps 
there  is  a  mistake  in  time. 

There  is  another  tradition  that  wlien  the  Y'ai-clliu 5  altar  to 
the  spirits  of  the  land  disappeared  in  Sung,  the  tripods  went  down 
in  the  river  below  tlie  city  of  Pr^ng-ch  hig.6  Twenty-nine  years 
later  Ch'in  united  the  Empire.7  Sucli  being  the  case,  the  tripods 
would  not  have  come  into  the  possession  of  (，f"n,  and  must  have 
been  lost  from  the  Chou  already. 

They  were  not  spirits.  During  tlic  "  Spring  and  Autumn  '， 
period,  five  stones  fell  down  in  Sung.  Those  five  stones  were  stars. 
The  separation  of  stars  from  heaven  is  like  the  disappearance  of 
the  tripods  from  earth.  The  stars  falling  down  from  lieavim  did 
not  thereby  become  spirits,  why  then  should  the  tripods  vanishing 
from  earth,  acquire  spiritual  powers ?  In  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn  " 
time,  three  mountains  vanished  in  tlie  same  manner  as  the  7'  ai-c/t'iu 
altar  disappeared.  Five  stars  descended  from  lieaven  in  Sunff,  three 
mountains  vanished,  five  stones  fell  down,  and  the  T' ai-ch' i"  altar 
disappeared.  All  these  events  were,  brought  about  by  causes  re- 
siding in  tliese  things.  Tlie  loss  of  the  tripods  \va«  also  the  «•  fleet 
of  some  cause.  One  must  not  regard  them  as  spirits  merely  on 
account  of  their  disappearance.  If  the  tripods  resembled  tlie  three 
mountains  of  C/i'in,  their  disappearance  is  no  sul'ficient  reason,  why 
tliey  should  be  spirits.  If  tliey  really  possessed  knowledge,  and 
wished  to  avoid  the  disastrous  revolution,  tlie  reigns  of  Clnelt  and 
Chou  would  have  been  tlie  jiroper  time  for  that. 

The  disorganisation  and  lawlessness  were  never  worse  than 
under  CUieh  and  Chou,  but  at  that  time  the  tripods  did  not  dis- 


The  eastern  part  of  Shantung  under  the  <  'Kin  dynasty. 
A  city  in  Kiangm,  the  modern  IIm-c/tou-/u. 
A  river  in  S/iantunt/. 

Quotation  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  G,  p.  18. 

T  ai-chiu  was  a  nliirc  in  the  Yitng-cK^ng  district,  llonan, 

lr fng-di  nuj  does  not  lie  on  the  Sue  River,  but  on  another  small  river. 

In  '221  b.c.    Then  the  tripods  would  have  been  lost  in  250  b.c. 


Digitized  by  Google 


508 


Lun-Heng:  E.  Critique. 


appear.  The  decadence  of  the  kings  of  Choti  was  far  from  that 
of  Chieh  and  Cliou.  Yet  tlie  tripods  remained  with  the  dissolute 
Chieh  and  Chou,  and  left  the  declining  ('/ton. 1  They  did  not  stay 
nor  leave  at  the  proper  time,  and  gave  no  sign  of  being  spirits, 
endowed  with  knowledge. 

It  is  possible  that,  at  the  collapse  of  the  Chou,  the  men  of 
General  Chiu,  who  were  in  great  number,  saw  the  tripods,  and 
stole  them,  and  that  some  miscreants  melted  them,  and  made  them 
into  other  objects,  so  that,  when  Ch  in  Shilt  Huang  Ti  searched  for 
them,  he  could  not  find  them.  Subsequently  they  were  called 
spirits,  which  gave  rise  to  the  story  that  they  were  suuk  in  the 
Sse  River. 

[Under  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Hsiao  Win  71 2  a  man  of 
Cfiao、  llsin  Yuan  P'ing  addressed  a  memorial  to  the  throne  saying, 
" The  Chou  tripods  are  lost  in  the  midst  of  the  Sse  River.  Now 
the  Ihumg-ho  overflows,  aud  communicates  with  the  Sse.  In  a  nortli- 
easterly  direction  near  Fin-yin  I  perceive  a  metallic  fluid.  I  presume 
it  to  be  an  angury  of  the  Chou  tripods'  return.  But  unless  fetched, 
they  will  not  come  out." 

Thereupon  Hsiao  Win  Ti  sent  a  special  envoy  to  superintend  a 
temple  south  of  Fhi-yin 3  near  the  River,  in  the  hope  that  a  spirit 
would  bring  the  Chou  tripods.  Others  denounced  llsin  Yuan  Iy ing、 
showing  that,  what  he  liad  said  about  the  supernatural  vessels, 
was  an  imposture.  Then  Hsin  Yuan  P'ing  was  delivered  to  a  tri- 
bunal, which  sentenced  him  to  death.4]  The  statement  tbat  the 
tripods  are  in  the  Sse  is  like  the  imposture  of  Hsin  Yuan  P'ing  that 
he  saw  the  spiritual  fluid  of  the  tripods. 

1  Viz.  the  Chou  dynasty. 

a  179-156  b.c. 

， A  place  in  Shatuti,  in  the  present  Wan  ehUan  kiien. 

*  Quotation  from  the  Shi-chi  chap.  28,  p.  20. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices  to  the  Departed. 


509 


CHAPTER  XLI. 
Sacrifices  to  the  Departed  (Sse-yt). 

The  world  believes  in  sacrifices,  imagining  that  he  who  sacri- 
fices becomes  happy,  auil  he  who  does  not,  becomes  unhappy. 
Therefore,  when  people  are  taken  ill,  they  first  try  to  learn  by 
divination,  what  evil  influence  is  the  cause.  Having  found  out 
this,  they  prepare  sacrifices,  and,  after  these  have  been  performed, 
their  mind  feels  at  ease,  and  the  sickness  ceases.  With  great  ob- 
stiuacy  they  believe  this  to  be  the  effect  of  the  sacrifices.  They 
never  desist  from  urging  the  necessity  of  making  offerings,  maintain- 
ing that  the  departed  are  conscious,  and  that  ghosts  and  spirits 
eat  and  drink  like  so  many  guests  invited  to  dinner.  When  these 
guests  are  pleased,  they  thank  the  host  for  bis  kindness. 

To  prepare  sacrifices  is  quite  correct,  but  the  belief  that  spirits 
can  be  affected  thereby  is  erroneous.  In  reality  the  idea  of  these 
oblations  is  nothing  else  than  that  the  host  is  anxious  to  manifest 
his  kindness.  The  spirits  are  not  desirous  of  tasting  the  offerings, 
as  I  am  about  to  prove. 

Our  sacrifices  are  for  the  purpose  of  showing  our  gratitude 
for  benefits  enjoyed.  In  tlie  same  manner  we  are  kind  to  living 
people,  but  would  the  latter  therefore  wish  to  be  treated  to  a 
dinner?  Now  those  to  whom  we  present  sacrifices  are  dead;  the 
dead  are  devoid  of  knowledge  and  cannot  eat  or  drink.  How  can 
we  demonstrate  that  they  cannot  possibly  wish  to  enjoy  eating 
and  drinking? 

Heaven  is  a  body  like  the  Earth.  Heaven  has  a  number  of 
stellar  mansions,  as  tlie  Earth  lias  houses.  These  houses  are  at- 
tached to  the  body  of  the  Earth,  as  the  stellar  mausioos  are  fixed 
to  the  substance  of  Heaven.  Provided  that  •  this  body  and  this 
substance  exist,  then  there  is  a  mouth,  which  can  eat.  If  Heaven 
and  Earth  possess  mouths  to  eat,  they  ought  to  eat  up  all  the 
food  offered  them  in  sacrifice.  If  they  have  no  mouths,  they  are 
incorporeal,  and  being  incorporeal,  they  are  air  like  clouds  and  fog. 
Should  the  spirit  of  Heaven  and  Earth  be  like  the  human  spirit, 
could  a  spirit  eat  and  driuk? 


Digitized  by  Google 


510 


Lun-Hcng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


A  middle-sized  man  is  seven  to  eight  feet1  high  and  four  to 
live  spans  in  girth.  One  peck  of  food  aud  one  peck  of  broth  are 
enough  to  satisfy  his  appetite  and  his  thirst.  At  the  utmost  he 
can  consume  three  to  four  pecks.  The  size  of  Heaven  and  Earth 
is  many  ten  thousand  Li.  Cocoou  millet,  ox  rice2  cakes,  and  a 
big  soup  are  offered  them  on  round  hills,  but  never  more  thau 
several  bushels.  How  could  such  food  appease  the  hunger  of 
heaven  and  earth? 

Heaven  and  Earth  would  have  feelings  like  man.  When  a 
man  has  not  got  enough  to  eat,  he  is  vexed  with  his  host,  and 
docs  not  requite  him  with  kindness.  If  we  hold  that  Heaven  and 
Earth  can  be  satiated,  then  the  sacrifices  presented  to  tliem  in 
ancient  times  were  derogatory  to  their  dignity. 

Mountains  are  like  human  bones  or  joints,  Rivers  like  human 
Mood.  When  we  have  eaten,  our  intestines  are  filled  with  food, 
wliich  forms  abundance  of  bones  and  blood.  Now,  by  the  obla- 
tions made  to  Ileaveu  and  Kartli,  Mountains  and  Rivers  are  also 
satiated  along  with  Heaven  and  Earth,  yet  Mountains  and  Rivers 
have  still  their  special  sacrifices,  as  if  they  were  other  spiritual 
beings.  That  would  be  like  a  man  who,  after  having  eaten  his 
fill,  would  still  feed  his  bones  and  his  blood. 

We  thank  the  Spirits  of  die  Land  and  Grain  for  their 
kindness  in  letting  grain  and  other  organisms  grow.  The  ten  thou- 
sand people  grow  on  earth,  as  hair  does  on  a  body.  In  the 
sacrilu'es  to  Heaven  *aud  Earth  the  Spirits  of  the  Land  and  Grain 
are  therefore  included.  Good  men  revere  them,  and  make  to 
them  special  oirerings.  They  must  hold  that  they  are  spirits. 
In  this  manner  man  ought  to  specially  feed  his  skin  and  llesli 
likewise. 

Tlie  origin  of  the  Five  Sacri fices 3  is  the  Earth.  The  Outer 
unci  Inner  Doors  arc  made  of  wood  and  earth,  both  substances 
growing  from  earth.  The  Well,  the  Heartli,  and  the  Inner  Court 
of  the  houso  all  depeud  on  earth.  In  the  sacri  lice  to  the  Earth, 
th*、se  Five  Sacrifices  ； ire  therefore  compriscil.  Out  of  veneration  a 
go')(l  man  propares  special  oblatioiiH  for  tliera,  being  convinced 
undubitably  that  tlioy  are  spirits.  But  tliat  would  be,  as  if  a  man. 
after  having  appeased  his  appetite,  were  still  specially  feeding 
his  body. 

1  Ancient  Chinese  feet,  which  are  much  .smaller  tljan  the  modern. 
， Large  kinds  of  rii-e  and  miltet. 

3  The  Five  SacriBces  of  the  house  often  mentioned  in  the  Liki. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices  to  the  Departed. 


511 


The  Gods  of  Wind,  Rain,  and  Thunder 1  are  a  special  class 
of  spirits.  Wind  is  like  the  human  breath,  rain  like  secretions, 
and  thunder  like  borboryguiua.  These  three  forces  are  inherent  in 
heaven  and  earth,  therefore  they  partake  of  the  sacrifices  to  the 
latter.  Pious  men  make  special  offerings  to  them  &s  a  mark  of 
respect,  regarding  them  as  spiritual  beings.  Then  a  man  ought  to 
feed  still  his  breath,  his  secretions,  and  his  borborygmus. 

The  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  like  human  eyes,  the  Stars  like 
human  hair.  These  luminaries  being  attached  to  heaven,  they  are 
included  in  ihe  sacrifices  presented  to  the  latter.  Out  of  piety  good 
men  honour  them  with  special  sacrifices  regarding  them,  no  doubt, 
as  spirits.  Tliat  would  be  tantamount  to  our  still  feeding  our  eyes 
and  hair  after  having  satisfied  our  appetite. 

The  ancestral  temple  is  tlie  place  of  one's  forefathers.  During 
their  life-time  they  are  diligently  and  reverently  maintained  and 
nourished  by  their  children,  and  after  tbeir  deaths  the  latter  dare 
not  become  unfaitliful,  and  therefore  prepare  sacrifices.  Out  of 
consideration  for  their  ancestors  they  attend  their  dead  to  show  that 
they  have  not  forgotten  their  forefathers.  As  regards  tlie  sacrifices 
to  the  Five  Emperors  and  the  Three  Rulers  like  Huang  Ti  and  7» 
A  m,  they  were  oflered  in  appreciation  of  their  mighty  efforts  and 
great  accomplitilimente,  for  people  did  not  forget  their  virtues.  This, 
however,  is  no  proof  that  there  really  are  spirits,  who  can  enjoy 
offerings.  Being  unable  to  enjoy,  they  cannot  be  spirits,  and  not 
being  spirits,  tliey  cannot  cause  happiness  nor  unliappiness  either. 

Happiness  au(l  unliappiness  originate  from  joy  and  auger,  and 
joy  and  anger  proceed  from  tlic  belly  and  tlie  intestiiios.  He  who 
possesses  a  belly  and  intestines,  can  eat  and  drink,  aud  he  who 
cannot  eat  and  drink,  has  no  belly  and  no  intestines.  Without  a 
belly  and  intestines,  joy  and  anger  are  impossible,  and  in  default 
of  joy  and  anger,  one  cannot  produce  happiness  and  unliappiness. 

Somebody  might  object  that  odours  cannot  be  eaten.  1  reply 
that  smelling,  eating,  and  drinking  are  very  much  tlie  same.  With 
the  mouth  one  eats,  and  with  the  mouth  one  likewise  smells.  Un- 
less there  be  a  belly  and  intestines,  tlicrc  is  no  inoutli,  and  with- 
out a  mouth  one  cannot  eat  nor  smell  eitlier. 

How  can  、ve  demonstrate  that  smelling  is  out  of  the  question? 

Wlien  some  one  oflfers  a  sacrifice,  and  others  pass  by,  they 
do  not  immediately  become  aware  of  it,    Unless  we  use  the  mouth, 


1   F<Ttg  To,  tl"，  Prince  of  the  Wind,  Yu  Shiht  tlie  Master  of  Rain,  and  AW  Kung, 
the  Thunderer.    Their  sacrifices  are  detennined  in  the  Chon  ritual. 


Digitized  by  Google 


512 


Lun-Hcng:  F.  Folklore  aud  Religion. 


we  must  use  the  nose  for  smelling.  When  with  the  mouth  or  the 
nose  we  smell  something,  our  eyes  can  see  it,  and  what  our  eyes 
perceive,  our  hands  can  strike.  Now,  in  case  the  bauds  cannot 
strike,  we  know  that  the  mouth  and  the  nose  cannot  smell. 

Another  objection  might  be  raised.  When  Duke  Pao  of  Sung1 
was  sick,  the  priest  said,  "  Yeh  Ku  will  direct  the  service  of  the 
discontented  spirit."  The  ghost  leaning  on  a  pole  addressed  Yeh  Ku 
saying,  "Why  are  my  vessels  not  filled  with  plenty  of  rice?  Why 
are  the  grazing  animals  for  the  sacrifice  not  big  and  fat?  Wliy 
are  the  sceptres  and  badges  not  of  the  proper  measure?  Is  it  your 
fault  or  Pao's'f  " 

" Vno  is  still  an  infant  in  swathing  cloth,"  replied  Yt'h  Ku  with 
a  placid  face,  "  who  understands  nothing  about  this.  For  how 
could  he  know  or  give  any  directions? " 

The  angry  spirit  lifted  bis  pole  and  struck  Yeh  Ku  dead  on 
tlie  steps  of  the  altar. ― Can  this  not  be  considered  a  proof  of  liis 
having  been  able  to  use  his  hand? 

It  is  not  certain  that  Yeh  tin's  death  was  caused  by  the  blow 
of  a  discontented  ghost.  Just  at  that  moment  he  was  (loomed  to 
die;  an  apparition  took  the  shape  of  a  malignant  ghost,  and  being 
si l aped  like  a  ghost,  it  had  to  speak  like  a  ghost,  aud  it  also  dealt 
a  blow  like  a  ghost.    How  do  we  know? 

A  gh<»st  is  a  spirit,  and  spirits  are  prescient.  Then  after 
having  remarked  that  the  sacrificial  vessels  were  not  full  of  rice, 
tbe  sceptres  and  badges  not  of  the  proper  size,  the  victims  leau 
and  small,  the  ghost,  being  prescient,  ought  to  have  reproached 
Yeh  Ku  and  struck  him  with  the  pole.  There  was  no  need  to  first 
ask  him.  The  fact  that  he  first  asked,  shows  that  he  was  not 
prescient,  and,  if  he  was  not  prescient,  it  is  plain  that  he  was  not 
a  spirit.  Being  neither  prescient  nor  a  spirit,  he  could  not  appear 
with  a  body,  nor  talk,  nor  strike  a  man  with  a  pole. 

Yeh  Ku  was  an  honest  official  who  took  the  guilt  upon  him- 
self, and  offered  himself  for  punishment,  so  that  the  ghost  struck 
liira.  Had  he  been  dishonest  and  inculpated  Pao、  tbe  ghost  would 
have  hit  Pao  with  his  pole. 

Furthermore,  provided  that  the  spirit  resented  the  laxity  in 
the  performance  of  his  sacrifice,  and  therefore  made  his  ajipearance, 
and  killed  the  superintendent  of  the  sacrifice,  then  would  lie,  iu 
case  all  tlie  rites  were  duly  fulfilled,  be  pleased  and  appear,  and 


1  Duke  J '(to  alias  Wrn  of  Sung,  609- 5SS  b.c    His  death  is  chronicled  in  the 
Ch'un-ckiu,  Duke  (  h'tny  2nd  year. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices  to  the  Departed. 


51:4 


as  a  favour  present  the  sacrificer  with  some  food?  Men  have  joy 
and  anger,  and  spirits  should  have  these  sensations  likewise.  A 
man  who  does  not  rouse  another's  anger,  preserves  his  life,  whereas 
he  who  displeases  him,  loses  it.  The  malignant  ghost  in  his  wrath 
made  his  appearance,  and  iuflicted  a  punishment,  but  the  sacrifices 
of  the  Sung  State  have  certainly  often  been  according  to  the  rites, 
wherefore  did  the  ghost  not  appear  then  to  reward? 

Joy  and  anger  not  being  like  the  human,  rewards  and  punish- 
ments are  not  like  those  dealt  out  by  man  either,  and  owing  to 
this  difference  we  cannot  believe  that  Yeh  Ku  was  slain  by  the 
spirit. 

Moreover,  in  the  first  place,  for  smelling  one  takes  in  air, 
and  for  speaking  one  breathes  it  out.  He  who  can  smell,  can  talk 
likewise,  as  lie  who  inhales,  can  exhale  too.  Should  ghosts  and 
spirits  be  able  to  smell,  they  ought  to  speak  about  the  sacrifices. 
Since  they  are  incapable  of  speech,  we  know  that  they  cannot 
smell  either. 

Secondly,  all  those  who  smell,  have  their  mouths  and  their 
noses  open.  Should  their  noses  be  stopped  up  by  a  cold,  or  their 
mouths  gagged,  olfaction  becomes  impossible.  When  a  man  dies, 
his  mouth  and  his  nose  putrefy,  how  could  they  still  be  used  for 
smelling? 

Thirdly,  the  IAki  has  it  that,  when  men  have  died,  they  are 
dreaded.  They  then  belong  to  another  class  of  beings  than  man, 
hence  the  dread.  As  corpses  they  cannot  move,  they  decay,  and 
are  annibilated.  Since  they  do  not  possess  the  same  bodies  as 
living  people,  we  know  that  they  cau  have  no  intercourse  with 
the  living.  As  their  bodies  are  dissimilar,  and  as  we  know  that 
there  can  be  no  intercourse,  their  eating  and  drinking  cannot  be 
like  that  of  man.  The  Mongols  and  the  Annamese 1  are  different 
nations,  and  in  the  matter  of  eating  their  tastes  widely  differ.  No、v， 
the  difference  between  the  departed  and  the  living  is  not  merely 
like  that  between  the  Mongols  and  the  Annamese.  Hence  we  infer 
that  the  dead  caunot  smell. 

Fourthly,  when  a  man  is  asleep,  we  may  put  some  food  near 
him,  he  does  not  know,  but.  as  soon  as  he  awakes,  he  becomes 
aware  of  it,  and  then  may  eventually  cat  it.  When  a  man  is  dead, 
however,  and  sleeps  tlie  long  sleep,  from  which  there  is  no  awaken- 
ing, bow  could  he  know  anything  or  eat  then?  This  shows  that 
he  is  unable  to  smell. 


1  The  Hu  in  the  north,  and  the  Yiieh  in  the  south  of  China. 

l.un  -  Hrng.  33 


Digitized  by  Google 


514 


Lun-Heng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


Somebody  might  raise  the  question,  what  it  means  that  the 
spirits  partake  of  a  sacrifice,  as  people  say.  It  means  that  people 
conscientiously  clean  the  sacrificial  vessels,  that  the  rice  is  fragrant, 
and  the  victims  fat,  so  that  persons  coming  near  and  perceiving  all 
this  would  fe«il  inclined  to  eat  and  drink.  With  these  their  foelinj^s 
they  credit  the  ghosts  and  spirits,  wliich,  if  they  were  conscious, 
would  decidedly  enjoy  the  offerings.  Therefore  people  spoak  of 
the  8j)irits,  as  though  they  were  partaking  of  the  sacrifice. 

Another  objection  in  the  following: 一 Tlie  Yiking  says  that  an 
ox  killed  by  the  eastern  neighbour,  is  not  like  the  liumble  o fieri ng 
of  the  western  neighbour..1  This  assertion  that,  the  eastern  neigh- 
bour does  not  come  up  to  the  western,  signifies  that  the  animal 
of  the  eastern  neighbour  is  big,  but  his  luck  small,  wliereas  the 
fortune  of  the  western  neighbour  is  great,  though  bis  sacrifice  be 
poor.  Now,  if  the  spirits  are  denied  the  faculty  of  enjoying  the 
offering,  liow  can  we  determine  the  amount  of  happiness? 

This  also  depends  on  the  (juestion,  whether  a  sacrifice  is  care- 
fully prepared,  so  that  everything  is  clean,  or  not.  Chou  had  an 
ox  immolated,  but  he  did  Dot  fulfill  all  the  rites.  Wen  Wang,  on 
the  other  hand,  made  only  a  small  oflering,  but  did  his  utmost  to 
show  his  devotion.  People  condemn  a  lack  of  ceri'monies,  and  are 
full  of  praise  for  a  pious  fuliilment  of  all  the  rites.  He  who  is 
praised  by  the  people,  finds  si 屮 port  in  all  Ins  enterprises,  wliile 
tlie  one  who  is  disliked,  meets  witli  opposition,  whatever  lit-  says 
or  does.  Such  a  resistanre  is  no  .smaller  misfortune  than  the  re- 
jection of  a  sacriiice  by  tlie  spirits,  and  the  general  support  is  a 
happiness  like  that  experienced,  wIhmi  the  spirits  smell  the  oblation. 

(I hosts  cannot  be  pleased  or  angry  at  a  sacrifice  for  the 
following  reason.  Provided  that  spirits  do  not  require  man  for 
their  maintenance,  then,  in  ease  they  did  need  tliem,  tliey  would 
no  more  be  spiritual.  If  we  believe  in  spirits  sindling  tlie  sacrifices, 
and  in  sacrifices  causing  happiness  or  misfortune,  liow  do  we  imagine 
tlie  dwelling  plarrs  of  the  gliosis?  Have  tliey  their  own  provisions 
stored  up,  or  must  tliey  take  the  human  food  to  appease  tlieir 
hunger?  Should  tliey  possess  their  own  stores,  these  would  as- 
suredly be  other  than  the  human,  and  tliey  would  not  have  to 
，'at  human  food.  If  tliey  have  no  provisions  of  their  own,  then 
man  would  have  to  make  ofierings  to  tliem  every  morning  and 
every  evening.  Attcording  a«  he  liad  sacrificed  to  them  or  not, 
they  would  be  eitlier  satiated  or  hungry,  and  according  as  they 

1  Yikimj,  (i.'5d  diagrnm  {Chi-ch^  Ugge's  translation  p.  206. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices  to  the  Departed. 


516 


had  eaten  their  fill  or  were  hungry,  they  would  be  pleased  or 
vexed. 

Furthermore,  sick  people  behold  ghosts,  and,  while  asleep, 
people  meet  with  the  departed  in  their  dreams.  They  are  shaped 
like  men,  therefore  the  sacrifices  presented  to  them  are  like  human 
food.  Having  food  and  drink,  the  spirits  must  be  provided  with 
raiment  too,  therefore  one  makes  silken  clothes  for  them  after  the 
fashion  of  the  living.  Their  sacrifices  are  like  dinners  for  the  living. 
People  desire  to  feed  them,  and  hope  that  the  ghosts  will  cat  tbeir 
offerings.  As  regards  the  clothes,  however,  they  are  not  larger  than 
from  five  or  six  inches  to  one  foot,  Now,  supposing  that  tall  and 
big  spirits,  which  have  been  observed,  are  to  dou  garments  of  a 
foot  in  length,  would  they  be  very  pleased,  and  bestow  happiness 
on  the  donors? 

Should  the  ghosts,  which  have  been  seen,  be  really  dead  men, 
then  the  clothes  made  for  them  ought  to  be  like  those  of  the  living, 
if,  however,  those  garments  are  really  put  ou  by  the  ghosts,  they 
must  be  shaped  like  dolls.  Thus  the  question  about  ghosts  and 
spirits  remains  au  open  one.  How  is  it  possible  then  to  secure 
their  protection  and  happiness  by  means  of  abundant  oirerings,  and 
how  can  people  firmly  believe  iu  this? 


Digitized  by  Google 


51G 


Ltm-H^ng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 
Sacrifices  (CA»-yi). 

According  to  the  Liki  the  emperor  sacrifices  to  Heaven  and 
Earth,  the  feudal  princes  to  the  Mouutaius  ami  Rivers,1  the  mi- 
nisters, and  high  dignitaries  to  the  Five  Genii,2  the  scholars  and 
the  common  people  to  their  ancestors.3  From  the  oflerings  to  the 
spirits  of  the  Land  and  Grain  down  to  those  in  the  ancestral  hall 
there  is  a  gradation  from  the  son  of  heaven  down  to  the  coin- 
monere. 

The  S/ruking  says  that  a  special  sacrifice  was  made  to  S/iangti, 
a  pure  one  to  the  Six  Superior  Powers,  a  sacrifice  on  high  to  the 
Mountains  and  Rivers,  and  a  sacrifice  to  the  various  spirits  round 
about.4 

[Shun,  says  the  Liki,  offered  the  imperial  sacrifice  to  Huang 
Ti、  the  suburban  sacrifice  to  Ti  K  u,  the  patriarchal  to  C/ntan  Hsil, 
and  the  ancestral  to  Yoo.  The  Hsia  dynasty  likewise  presented  the 
imperial  sacrifice  to  Huang  Ti、  but  the  suburban  to  K'ttn,6  the  patri- 
archal to  Chimn  Hsil,  aud  the  ancestral  to  Yil.  The  Yin  dynasty 
transferred  the  imperial  sacrifice  to  Ti  K'u,  the  suburban  to  Ming,7 
the  patriarchal  to  Usiehy  and  the  ancestral  to  T  aiig.  The  C/tou  dy- 
nasty made  the  imperial  sacrifice  to  Ti  A'  m,  tlie  suburban  to  Chi H, 
the  patriarchal  to  Wm  Waug^  and  the  ancestral  to  Wu  Wang.'* 

Wood  was  burned  on  the  big  altar  as  a  sacrifice  to  Heaven, 
a  victim  was  buried  in  the  big  pit  as  a  sacrifice  to  Earth.    A  red 

1  The  mountaiii.s  and  rivers  of  their  territory. 

s  The  five  genii  of  the  home  to  whom  the  Five  Sacrifices  were  offered.  See 
further  on. 

»  Cf.  Liki,  C/iii-li  (Leffffe,  Sacred  Books  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  116). 
«  Shuhinff,  Shun-tirn  Pt.  II,  Bk.  I,  6  [Leg'je  Vol.  Ill,  Pt.  I,  p.  33). 
5  Huang  Ti,  Ti  K'u  and  (  'liu<m  Hsu  are  mythical  emperors.    Ti  K'u  \n  said 
to  have  been  the  father  of  Ya<>. 

*  K'un,  the  father  of  YU. 

7  Ming  was  a  descendant  of  Hsieh,  who  was  a  son  of  Ti  ICu. 

8  ('hi  二  IIou  Chit  the  ancestor  of  the  Chau  dynasty. 

•  The  four  sacrifices  here  mentioned  were  presented  by  the  sovereigns  of  the 
ancient  dynasties  to  the  founders  of  their  dynasties,  their  ancestors,  and  prederessora. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices. 


517 


calf  was  immolated,  and  a  sheep  buried  in  bright  daylight  as  a 
sacrifice  to  the  Seasons,  and  they  approachod  the  sacrificial  pits 
and  altars  to  offer  sacrifice  to  the  Heat  and  the  Cold.  In  the  im- 
perial palace  a  sacrifice  was  made  to  the  Sun,  and  in  clear  night 
they  sacrificed  to  the  Moon.  Oblations  were  made  to  the  Stars  in 
the  (lark  hall,  to  Water  and  Drought  in  the  rain  ball,  and  to  the 
Four  Cardinal  Points  at  the  lour  pits  and  altars. 

The  mountain  forests,  the  valleys  of  the  rivers,  and  the  liills 
and  cliffs  can  emit  clouds  and  produce  wind  and  rain.  All  tl»ese 
curious  phenomena  are  regarded  as  spirits.  The  ruler  of  the  world 
sacrifices  to  all  the  spirits,  the  princes  only  as  long  as  tliey  are 
within  their  territories,  but  not,  when  tliey  have  left  them.] 1 

Sucli  are  tlie  official  sacrifices  according  to  usage  and  tlie 
prescribtid  rites.  The  emperor  treats  Heaven  like  his  father  and 
Earth  like  his  mother.  Conformably  to  human  customs  he  practises 
filial  piety,  whicli  accounts  for  the  sacrifices  to  Heaven  and  Earth. 
In  tlie  matter  of  Mountains  and  Rivers  and  the  subscqiu'iit:  deities 
the  offerings  prcsentt'd  to  tliem  are  in  appreciation  of  their  d^st'rts. 
A  living  man  distinguishing  liimselt*  is  rewarded,  ghosts  and  spirits 
which  are  well-deserving  have  their  sacrifices.  When  mountains 
send  forth  clouds  and  rain,  tlie  welcome  moisture  for  all  the  or- 
ganisms, and  when  the  Six  Superior  Powers  keep  in  their  six 
spheres,  and  aid  Heaven  and  Earth  in  rlieir  cliarigcs,  the  emperor 
venerates  them  by  sacrifices,  whenco  their  appellation  the  "  Six 
Honoured  Ones."2 

The  spirits  of  Land  and  Grain  arc  rewarded  for  their  kind- 
ness in  letting  all  the  things  grow,  the  spirit  S/i^3  for  all  tlie 
living  and  growing  things,  tlu*  spirit  Cltix  for  the  live  kinds  of  grain. 

The  Five  Sacrifices  are  in  recognition  of  the  merits  of  the 
Outer  and  Inner  Doors,  the.  Well,  tlie  Hearth,  and  tlie  Inner  Hall. 
Through  the  outer  and  inner  doors  man  walks  in  aud  out,  the 
well  and  the  hearth  afford  him  drink  and  food,  and  in  the  inner 
hall  he  finds  a  resting-place.  These  five  are  equally  meritorious, 
therefore  they  all  partake  of  a  sacrifice. 


1  Quotation  from  the  Liki,  (  hi-fa  (Law  of  sacrifices).  The  commentators, 
whom  Legge  follows  in  his  translation  {Sacred  Books  Vol.  XXVIII,  p. 201)，  read  much 
between  the  lines,  wliirh  appears  rather  problematic. 

a  What  the  "  Six  Honoured  Ones  "  are,  is  disputed.  Some  say :— water,  fire, 
wind,  thunder,  hills,  and  lakes;  others  explain  tlie  term  as  signifying:— the  sun,  the 
moon,  the  stars,  rivers,  seas,  and  mountains. 

， The  Spirit  of  the  Land  or  the  Soil. 

«  The  Spirit  of  Grain. 


Digitized  by  Google 


518 


Lun-Hrng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


Clii  of  Chou 1  was  called  S/,ao  llao}  He  had  four  uncles  of 
the  names  of  Chung,  Kai,  Hsiu,  and  Hxis  who  could  master  metal, 
fire,  and  wood,  wherefore  he  made  Chung  the  Genius  of  Spring, 
Koh  Mang,  Kai  the  Genius  of  Autumn,  Jtt  Shwt,  and  Ifsiu  and  list 
Gods  of  the  Winter,  FTsilnn  Miug.K  Tliey  never  neglected  their  office, 
and  assisted  Cli  mng-sang.h  To  these  the  Three  Offerings  are  made. 

Chuan  Hsil 6  had  a  son  called  Li -、  who  became  the  God  of 
Fire,  Chu  Yung.1  Kung  Kunff'sn  son  was  named  Kon  Lung.  He  was 
made  Lortl  of  the  Soil,  Hon  Tu.  The  Two  Sacrifices  refer  to  these 
two  personages. 

The  Lord  of  the  Soil  was  the  spirit  of  the  land  and  grain 
in  charge  of  the  iields.  The  son  of  Lieh  Shan,9  ('hu、  was  the  spirit 
of  the  grain  and  from  the  Ihia  dynasty  upwards  worshipped  as 

1  ('h'i、  the  first  ancestor  of  the  Ckmt  dynasty,  venorated  as  the  Spirit  of  Grain 
under  the  title  llou  Chi  "  Lord  of  the  Grain."    On  his  miraculous  birth  fjV/.  p.  174. 

3  \\y  other  authors  (''h'i  is  not  identified  with  tlie  legendary  emperor  Shao  Hao, 
whose  birth  was  miraculous  also.  His  mother  was  caused  to  conceive  by  a  huge  star 
like  a  rainbow  (T  ui-p'ir^-yu-lan). 

8  According  to  the  commentary  of  the  Liki  these  were  not  uncles,  but  sons 
of  Shao  Hao. 

*  The  names  of  these  deities  or  deified  men  correspond  to  their  functions  ： ― 
勾 -|*^"  Kou  Mang  二  "  Curling  fronds  and  spikeleto,"  Ju  Sfurn  =  "  Sprouts 

gathered;'  and 左 Hman  Minq  =  "  Dark  and  obscure."   According  to  the  Liki 
( Yiieh-ling)  these  three  deities  were  secondary  ttpirito,  each  presiding  over  three 
months  of  spring,  autumn,  and  winter.    Somo  say  that  Hmau  Miruj  waa  a  water 
.spirit.     As  the  spirit  of  summer 祝!^ 虫 Yung,  who  is  related  to  fire,  is 
venerated.   There  being  a  fixed  relation  between  the  four  seasons,  the  four  cardinal 
points,  and  the  five  elements  we  have  the  following  equations  ： ― 
Kou  Mang,  Genius  of  Spring,  the  east,  and  wood. 
(，hu  Yung,  Genius  of  Summer,  the  south,  and  fire. 
Ju  Shou,  Genius  of  Autumn,  the  west,  and  metal. 
Hstian  Minif,  Genius  of  Winter,  the  north,  and  water. 

1  suppose  that  in  tlie  clause  "  who  could  master  metal,  fin  and  wood  "  we 
ought  to  read  vater  in  lieu  of  fire,  for  the  gods  there  enumerated  are  those  of  wood, 
metal  aud  water.    The  spirit  of  fire  follows  in  the  next  clause. 

In  the  Liki,  Hon  Tu,  the  I>ord  of  the  Soil  is  made  to  cwrespond  to  tlie  middle 
of  the  four  seasons ― in  default  of  a  fifth  season  -  to  the  centre,  and  to  earth.  (Cf. 
Ug9t、  Books  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  281  Note.)    Thus  we  have:— 

llou  Tu,  Genius  of  Mid-year,  the  centre,  and  earth. 

These  Five  Spirits  aie  called  the  Wu  S/ten.  They  were  worshipped  during 
the  Chou  dynasty  and  are  mentioned  in  ancient  works  {Liki,  Tm-chitan,  Huai  Kan  T**). 

1  Another  name  of  Shao  Hao,  who  was  lord  of  <  'Kiung-mng. 

" A  legendary  emperor. 

7  Cf.  Note  4. 

s  See  p.  'J.M.I. 

9  Personal  name  of  the  emperor  Shcn  Aunt/,  who  was  lord  of  Luh-shan. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices. 


519 


sueli.  Ck i  of  i'hnu  was  likewise  spirit  of  the  grain.  From  the 
^hang  dynasty  downwards  people  sacrificed  to  liiin. 

Tlie  Liki  relates  that,  while  Lteh  Shan '  wan  swaying  tlie  em- 
pire, his  8on  of  the  name  of  (Tim 2  could  plant  all  the  various  kinds 
of  grain,  and  that  after  the  downfall  of  the  Ihia  dynasty,  Ch  i  of 
Cftou  succeeded  him,  and  tlierefore  was  worshipped  as  Spirit  of 
the  G raiu.  While  Kung  Kung  was  usurping  the  power  in  the  nine 
provinces,  his  son,  called  Lord  of  the  Soil,  was  able  to  pacify  tlie 
nine  countries,  and  therefore  was  worehipped  as  Spirit  of  the  Land.3 

There  is  a  tradition  to  the  effect  that  Yen  Ti4  produced  fire 
and  after  death  became  the  tutelary  god  of  the  Hearth,  and  that 
Yil  having  spent  his  energy  on  the  waters  of  the  empire,  became 
Spirit  of  the  Land  after  deatli. 

The  Liki  says  that  [the  emperor  institutes  the  Seven  Sacri- 
fices as  representative  of  liis  people,  namely  for  the  arbiter  of  fate,5 
for  the  inner  court,  for  the  gates  of  tlie  capital,  for  its  high -ways, 
for  the  august  d»Miions,B  for  the  doors,  and  for  the  hearths.  Tlie 
priin'os  on  their  part  institute  tlie  Five  Sacriliccs  f"r  their  States, 
namely  for  the  arbiter  of  fate,  for  the  inner  court,  for  the  gates 
of  tljeir  capital,  for  its  liigli-ways,  and  for  tlie  illustrious  demons. 
The  high  dignitaries  present  the  Tlm'c  Sucrificos  for  the  demons 
of  their  ancestors,  for  thi'ir  doors,  and  for  their  roads.  The  or- 
dinary scholars  make  Two  Offerings,  one  for  the  door  and  one  tor 
their  roads,  and  ti"'  corninoiiors  only  one,  either  for  their  inner 
doors  or  for  the  hearth.]7 

Tlu* re  are  no  fixed  rules  for  the  oblations  to  bo  made  to  tlie 
spirits  of  the  T.and  ami  Grain  or  for  the  Five  Sacrifices,  but  they 
are  all  expressions  of  gratitude  for  houefits  m*cive<l  from  (lie  spirits, 
whose  goodness  is  not  forgotten. 

】f  we  love  somebody  in  our  heart,  we  give  him  in  eat  and 
to  driuk,  and,  if  we  love  gliosts  and  spirits,  we  .sac ri lice  to  them. 
With  Yil  the  woi-sliip  of  the  spirits  of  tlie  land  and  grain,  ami  tlie 
sacrifices  to  the  lord  of  the  »r«*ii»  commence.  Su)>sequetitly  they 
fell  into  dt'suetiKU-,  until  in  tlie  4tl)  yt'ar  of  tho  emperor  Koo  Tsu * 

1  The  Liki  in  the  current  edition  writes: ― Li  S/ntn. 

2  The  JAki  has:  —  iV""y. 
»  Liki,  Chi-ja  (end). 

4  Dynastic  appellation  of  S/i/n  IWmp. 

6  The  fourth  star  in  Urm  major. 

B  The  discontented  and   mischievous  spirits  of  former  sovereigns  without 

children,  who  must  be  propitiated. 

7  Quotation  from  the  Liki,  (hi-fu  {Lrc,,,r,  loc.  cit.  p.  20f.). 
R  In  203  B.r. 


Digitized  by  Google 


520  Lun -Hong:  K.  Folklore  and  Religion. 

the  world  was  called  upon  to  sacrifice  to  the  Ling  constellation,1 
and  in  the  7th  year  people  were  enjoined  to  sacrifice  to  the  spirits 
<»f  the  land  and  grain.2 

The  ollerings  to  the  Ling  constellation  are  for  the  sake  of 
water  and  drought.  In  the  Liki  their  ancient  name  is  rain  sacri- 
fices. They  are  beiug  performed  for  the  people  praying  for  grain 
rain  and  for  grain  ears.  In  spring  they  sue  for  the  harvest,  and 
within  oue  year's  time  they  sacrifice  agaiu,  because  grain  grows 
twice  a  year.  【n  spring  this  is  done  in  the  second  moon,  and  in 
autumn  in  the  eighth.  Therefore  we  read  in  the  Aualects:9  "About 
the  end  of  spring,  wlicn  the  spring  robes  are  all  complete,  along 
with  five  or  six  young  men  who  have  assumed  the  cap,  and  six 
or  seven  boys,  1  would  wash  in  tlu*  F«,4  enjoy  the  breeze  among 
the  rain  altars,  and  return  home  singing." 

The  end  of  spring  is  the  fourth  month,  but  the  fourth  month 
of  the  Chou  dynasty  corresponds  to  our  first  and  second  montlis. 
During  tlio  time  of  the  second  month,  the  Dragon  Star  rises,  whence 
it  lias  been  observed  that,  when  the  dragon  appears,  the  rain  sacri- 
fice takes  place.  When  the  Dragon  Star  becomes  visible,  the  year 
has  already  advanced  as  far  as  the  time,  when  the  insects  begin 
to  8tir. 

Tlie  vernal  rain  sacrifice  has  fallen  into  oblivion,  while  the 
autumnal  one  is  still  observed.  Yot  during  all  the  ages  tlie 
sacrifices  to  tlie  Ling  Star  liave  always  been  prepared  until  now 
without  interruption,  only  tlie  ancient  name  lias  been  changed. 
tlnTofore  tlie  people  of  our  time  do  not  know  it,  and,  since  the 
，.','miiony  lias  been  aboiistuul,  the  scholars  are  not  cognisant  of  the 
fact.  Finding  nothing  about  the  sacrifice  to  the  Ling  Star  in  the 
Kites,  our  literati  could  not  form  an  opiuion  about  it,  and  declare 
that  the  emperor5  had  tlie  Ming  Star  in  view.  Now  the  Ming  Star 
is  identilied  with  the  planet  Jupiter. 9 

.JupiUr  stands  iu  the  oast,  the  east  rules  ovt'r  the  spring,  and 
the  spring  over  all  things  that  grow.  Coiisecjuently  one  sacrifices 
to  the  planet  .Jupiter,  they  say,  with  the  purpose  of  praying  for 


1  The  constellation  T'im-t'ien  "  Heavenly  field  "  in  Virgo. 
' According  to  the  Shi-chi  chap.  28  (Chavannes  Vol.  III，  p.  453)  Han  Kao  Tm 
instituted  these  sacrifices  in  the  0th  and  10th  years  of  his  reign. 
3  Analects  XI,  25,  VII. 

*  River  in  the  south-east  of  Shaniunt/. 
h  Kao  Tnt. 

*  明 'f-        "  Bright  star  "  is  generally  regarded  as  another  name  of  Venus. 
Cf.  Shi-chi  chap.  27,  p.  '22. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices, 


521 


vernal  bliss.  However  all  the  four  seasons  affect  tlie  growth  of 
tinners.  By  imploring  the  spring  only,  om*  lays  great  stress  on  tlie 
outset  and  emphasizes  the  beginning.  Provided  that  in  fact,  ac- 
cording to  the  opinion  of  the  scholars,  the  happiness  of  spring 
be  sought,  thrn  by  the  autumnal  sacrifice  spring  could  not  well 
be  implored. 1  In  conformity  with  tho  Yileh-liny11  oue  sacrifices 
to  tlie  inner  door  in  spring,  and  to  tlie  outer  door  in  au- 
tumn,3 all  in  accordancp  with  the  proper  time.  If  the  o  fie  rings 
made  to  tlie  outer  door  in  autumn  w<tc  considered  to  be  those 
to  the  inner  door,  would  this  be  approved  of  by  the  critics?  IT 
not,  then  the  Ming  Star  is  not  the  planet  Jupiter,  but  the  "-Dragon 
Star."* 

When  the  Dragon  Star  becomes  visible  in  the  second  month, 
one  prays  for  grain  rain  at  the  rain  sacrifice,  and,  when  in  the 
eighth  month  it  is  gt)ing  to  disappear,  one  sues  for  the  grain  crop 
at  tlie  autumnal  rain  sacriKcf.  The  literati  were  probably  aware  of 
this,  and  what  tliey  say  is  not  quite  unreasonable.  The  vernal 
sacrifice  for  rain  has  been  abolished,  and  only  tlie  autumnal  one 
has  survived.  This  explains  why  they  termed  the  star  correspond- 
ing to  the  autumnal  sacrifice  the  Ming  Star.5  The  correct  name 
however  is  the  Ling  Star. 

The  Ling  Star  means  a  spirit,  and  this  spirit  is  the  Dragon 
Star,  as  under  the  various  spirits  the  wind  god  Fhig  /V,,  tlie  rain 
god  Yil  Shi/i,  the  god  of  thunder,  Lei  Kung,  and  others  are  under- 
stood. Wind  produces  a  wafting,  rain  a  moisture,  and  thunder  a 
concussion.  Xl>f  lour  seasons,  tl"，  growing,  lieat  and  cold,  the 
natural  cljaugf's,  the  ami,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  are  what  people 
look  up  to,  iuundatioiiH  and  droughts  arc  wliat  they  dread.  From 
the  four  quarters  the  air  pours  in,  and  from  the  mountains,  tlie 
forests,  tlie  rivers,  and  valleys  people  gather  tht'ir  i'i，'hes.  All  this 
is  the  merit  of  tlie  spirits. 

Two  motives  are  underlying  all  sacrifices:  gratitude  for  re- 
ceived benefits  and  ancestor  worship.  We  show  our  gratitude  for 
the  efforts  others  have  take  on  our  behalf,  and  worship  our  an- 

1  Thus  Japit«r,  which  rules  over  spring  only,  could  not  well  be  sacrificed  to 
at  the  rain  sacrifice  in  autumn. 
1  A  chapter  of  the  Uki. 

»  Cf.  Lf^e*  translation  of  tlie  Uki  (Sncrr,l  Book*  Vol.  XXVII,  p.  251  and  283). 

*  The  Dragon  Star  occurs  in  the  Tto-chuan,  Duke  Il4ang  28th  year,  as  the 
star  of  Sung  and  ( 'hi'ng.    The  conmientary  explains  it  as  a  synonym  of  Jupiter. 

h  The  Ming  Star  ―  V,n\i«  governs  the  west  and  autumn,  whereas  Jupiter 
reigns  in  the  east  and  in  spring. 


Digitized  by  Google 


522 


Lun  - 1  Irtig :  F.  Folklore  and  Keligion. 


wstors  out  of  regard  for  their  kindness.  Special  efforts,  extra- 
ordinary goodness,  merits,  and  universal  reforms  are  taken  into 
consideration  by  wise  emperors,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  they 
have  instituted  sacrifices.  An  oblation  is  oflered  to  him  who  lias 
improved  <he  public  administration,  who  for  the  public  welfare  lias 
worked  till  his  death,  who  has  done  liis  best  to  strengthen  his 
country,  who  has  warded  otl*  great  disasters,  or  prevented  great 
misfortunes. 

[7*  K  u  could  fix  the  rourscs  of  the  stars  and  enlighten  the 
world. 1  Yao  knew  how  to  reward,  and  equitably  mete  out  punisli- 
ments,  so  that  justice  reigned  supremo.  S/iun  toiled  for  his  people, 
and  died  in  the  country,  K  un  laboured  to  quell  the  flood,  and  \va« 
banished  for  life.  Yil  could  take  up  liis  work.  Ihuwg  Ti  gave 
things  their  right  names  to  enlighten  people  about  the  use  to  be 
made  of  them.  Chuin  Ifsil  still  further  developed  this  system.  When 
Ihieh  was  minister  of  education,  the  people  flourished.  Ming  ful- 
filled his  official  duties  with  the  greatest  diligence,  and  found  his 
dea tli  in  the  water.  T nuy  inaugurated  a  liberal  government,  and 
delivered  the  peoplr  from  oppression.  Wen  Wang  relieved  the  misery 
of  tlie  people  by  culture  and  science,  Wu  Wang  by  his  military  ex- 
ploits. By  all  these  glorious  deeds  the  people  were  benefitted. 2| 
Tliey  rely  on  the  strength  of  ""、n  like  those,  and  show  their  grati- 
tude by  sa(rrilioe8. 

Tht'  anct'slors  in  th«  ancestral  temple  aro  our  own  kindre«l. 
Because,  while  they  are  alive,  it  is  customary  to  maintain  our 
parents,  this  duty  cannot  be  shirked,  when  they  arc  dead.  There- 
fore we  saiTilice  to  them,  as  though  they  were  still  alive.  C« hosts 
are  treated  like  men,  for  it  is  the  living  who  attend  the  dead.  For 
man  it  is  usual  to  reward  good  deeds,  and  to  maintain  the  nearest 
relatives,  whence  the  duty  to  requitt*  the  kindness  of  the  ancestors 
and  to  sacrifice  to  them  has  been  derived. 

When  tlie  dog  、vliii，li  ( 'on/ticiits  had  bvod  was  (lead,  he  re- 
quested Tse  Kitvy  to  bury  him.  "  I  have  been  told,  quotli  he,  tliat 
one  does  not  throw  an  old  curtain  away,  but  uses  it  to  bury  a 
horse,  and  that  an  old  cart-cover  is  not  thrown  away,  but  used  to 
bury  a  dog.  I  am  poor,  and  liave  no  cover  to  wrap  him  in." 
Then  lie  gave  him  a  mat,  ami  bade  him  not  to  throw  the  dog 
down  with  his  liead  lirst.3 


About  the  prognostics  furnished  by  tlie  stars. 
Quoted  from  the  Liki,  f'hi-fa  (Jjeijge,  he  nt.  p.  208). 
Quotation  from  the  Liki,  T  un-kuny  {Uffffe,  lor.  til.  p.  11)6). 


Digitized  by  Google 


Sacrifices. 


523 


Chi  T^e  1  of  Yen-ling11  passed  through  Hsil.  The  prince  of  IfsU^ 
was  very  fond  of  his  sword,  but,  because  Chi  Tse  had  to  go  as 
envoy  to  a  powerful  State  *  he,  at  that  time  did  not  yet  consent 
to  give  it  him.  When  Chi  Tse  came  back  from  his  mission,  the. 
prince  of  Hsll  liad  died  in  the  meantime.  Chi  Tse  unbuekled  bis 
sword  and  hung  it  up  on  a  tree  over  the  grave.  His  charioteer 
asked  for  whom  he  did  so,  since  the  prince  of  Usil  was  already 
dead.  "  Previously,  replied  (''hi  Tse,  I  have  made  this  promise  in 
ray  heart  already.  Shall  I  become  unfaithful,  because  the  prince 
of  Ihd  has  died?  "—Whereupon  lie  liung  uj)  liis  sword  and  went 
away.& 

Those  who  make  offerings  in  recognition  of  special  merits,  are 
animated  by  the  same  sentiment  as  Confucius,  wlien  lie  interred  his 
pet  dQg,  and  those  who  sacrifice,  lest  tliey  should  evade  a  former 
obligation,  have  the  same  tenderness  of  heart  as  Chi  Tse,  who  hung 
up  his  sword  on  a  tree  over  a  tomb. 

A  sage  knows  tliese  fa'，ts，  and  yet  while  sacrificing  he  will 
fast,  and  show  such  respect  and  devotion.  a«  if  therv  wore  really 
ghosts  and  spirits,  and  reform  without  cease,  as  if  happiness  and 
unliappiness  depended  tliereon.  But  though  people  thus  appreciate 
goodness,  and  honour  merit,  and  take  such  pains  to  manifest  their 
gratitude,  it  is  not  necessary  that  there  should  be  really  ghosts  to 
enjoy  tliesi*  manifestations.  Wo  st»<，  tliis  from  the  sacrifice  offered 
to  Earth  at  tlie  meals.  Wlion  people  are  going  to  eat  and  drink, 
they  respectfully  retire,  as  if  they  were  giving  prt'cedenw  to  some- 
body. ( 'onfiuins  says: -一 "  Although  tlic  food  might  be,  coarse  rice 
and  vegetable  soup,  one  must  ofTer  a  litth'  of  it  in  sacrifice  with 
a  grave,  respectful  air." " 

The  Liki  tells  us  that,  when  subjects  are  invited  to  dine  with 
their  prince,  he  first  calls  upon  (Iiein  to  sacrifice,  before  they  re- 
ceive their  rations. 

These  oblations  are  like  the  various  sacrifices  of  the  Liki. 
At  a  meal  om*  also  may  omit  the  ofl'criiif;,  and  though  venerating 
the  spirits  one  may  Corcgn  a  sacrifice.  Tlie  same  principle  holds 
good   for  all   tlie  sacrifices,   which   invariably  consist  in  giving 


1  Chi  Chn,  fourth  son  of  King  Shou  M-'ny  of  Wu,  who  died  iu  561  n.c. 

a  A  territory  in  Kinngm,  the  appanage  of  Prince  Chi  7V 

s  A  State  in  Anhti. 

4  He  was  on  an  embassy  to  Lu,  Chi,  Chtng,  Wei  and  Chin,  and  passed 

through  Hsu  in  544  B.r. 

4  See  a  parallel  passage  in  the  Sfii-rhi  chap.  '51,  p.  0  v. 
" Analech  X，  8,  X. 


Digitized  by  Google 


524 


Lun-Heng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


something  as  an  oflTeriug.  He  who  knows  that  at  the  sacrifice  to 
Earth  no  spirit  is  present,  and  still  maintains  that  ghosts  attend 
the  various  sacrifices,  ignores  how  to  reason  by  analogy. 

In  the  text  of  tlie  Classics  and  the  writings  of  the  worthies 
nothing  is  said  yet  about  ghosts  and  spirits,2  nor  did  they  compose 
special  works  on  this  subject.  The  uuautliorized  sacrifices  offered 
by  the  people  are  not  enjoyed  by  any  ghosts,  but  people  believe 
in  the  presence  of  spirits,  who  r^n  cause  either  happiness  or  mis- 
fortune. 

The  votaries  of  Taoism  studying  the  art  of  immortality  ab- 
stain from  eating  cereals  and  take  other  food  than  other  people 
with  a  view  to  purifying  themselves.  Ghosts  and  spirits,  however, 
are  still  more  ethereal  than  immortals,  why  then  should  they  use 
the  same  food  as  man? 

One  assumes  that  after  death  man  loses  his  consciousness, 
and  that  his  soul  cauuot  become  a  spirit.  But  let  us  suppose  that 
h«  did,  then  he  、vould  use  different  food,  and  using  different  food, 
he  would  not  like  to  eat  human  food.  Not  rating  human  food, 
he  would  not  iisk  us  for  it,  aud  liaving  nothing  to  ask  at  tlie 
hands  of  man,  he  could  not  give  luck  or  mishap. 

Our  joy  aud  anger  depend  on  tlie  fulfilment  of  our  wishes. 
When  they  are  satisfied,  we  arc  pleased,  when  not,  irritated.  In 
our  joy  we  are  generous  and  cause  happiness,  when  we  are  sulky, 
we  give  vent  to  our  anger  and  make  others  unhappy.  Ghosts  and 
spirits  are  insensible  of  joy  and  anger.  People  may  g6  on  sacri- 
ficing to  them  for  ever,  or  completely  disregard  and  forget  them, 
it  makes  no  difTerenoe,  how  could  they  render  man  happy  or  un- 
l»appy? 

1  This  is  not  quite  true.   The  Liki,  the  Tw-chuan,  aud  the  Shi-chi  treat  of 
ghosUi  and  spirits  in  many  places,  as  we  have  seen. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences.  525 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 
Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences  (Pien-sui). 

It  is  a  common  belief  that  evil  influences  cause  our  diseases 
and  our  deaths,  and  that  in  case  of  continual  calamities,  penalties, 
ignominious  execution,  and  derision  there  has  been  some  offence.1 
When  in  commencing  a  building,  in  moving  our  residence,  in 
sacrificing,  mourniug,  burying,  and  other  rites,  in  taking  up  office 
or  marrying,  no  lucky  day  has  been  chosen,  or  an  unpropitious 
year  or  mouth  have  not  been  avoided,  one  falls  in  with  demons 
and  meets  spirits,  which  at  that  ominous  time  work  disaster.  Tliua 
sickness,  misfortunes,  the  implication  in  criminal  cases,  punishments, 
and  even  deaths,  the  destruction  of  a  family,  and  the  annihilatiou 
of  a  whole  house  arc  brought  about  by  carelessness  and  disregard 
of  an  unfortunate  period  of  time.  But  in  reality  this  idea  is  un- 
reasonable. 

In  this  world  men  cannot  but  be  active,  and,  after  they  have 
been  so,  they  become  cither  lucky  or  unlucky.  Seeing  them  lucky, 
people  point  at  this  happiness  and  regard  it  as  the  happy  result 
of  their  previously  having  chosen  a  lucky  day,  and  seeing  them 
unlucky,  tliey  look  at  their  misfortune  as  the  fatal  consequence  of 
their  former  inattention  to  an  ill-timed  hour.  However,  there  are 
mauy  persons  who  become  unhappy,  although  they  have  chosen 
their  day,  and  others  who  obtain  happiness  in  spite  of  their  neglect. 
The  horoscopi^ts  and  seers,  desirous  of  propagating  their  mystical 
theory,  are  silent  upon  such  misfortunes,  when  they  observe  them, 
and  liush  up  those  cases  of  happiness,  ('ontrariwise  they  adduce 
abundance  of  misfortu nes  with  a  view  to  frighten  people,  lest  they 
should  be  careless  in  electing  a  day,  and  give  many  instances  of 
happiness  to  induce  them  to  be  cautious  in  observing  the  proper 
time.  Consequently  all  classes  of  people,  no  mattor  whether  they 
be  intelligent  or  feeble-inindeil,  virtuous  or  depraved,  princes  or 
common  citizens,  believe  in  this  from  fear,  and  dare  not  make  any 
opposition.    They  imagine  that  this  theory  is  of  high  antiquity, 


Not  a  moral  offence,  but  a  disregard  of  noxious  iti<lueiu*es. 


Digitized  by  Google 


526 


Lun-Hing:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


and  make  the  nicest  distiuctious,  regarding  it  as  a  revelation  of 
Heaven  and  Earth  and  a  doctrine  of  wise  and  holy  men.  Tbe 
princes  are  anxious  for  their  tlirone,  and  the  people  love  their 
own  persons,  wlierefore  tliey  always  cling  to  this  belief,  and  do 
not  utter  any  doubts.  Thus,  when  a  prince  is  about  to  engage  iu 
some  euterprise,  the  】ioroscopists  throng  his  halls,  and,  wheu  tbe 
people  have  som，'  business,  they  lirst  ask  for  the  proper  time  to 
avoid  collision  and  injury.  A  vast  literature  of  sophistic  works 
and  deceitful  writings  lias  appeared  in  consequence.  The  writers 
are  very  clever  iu  passing  their  inventions  off  as  knowledge  for 
their  own  profit,  winning  the  stupid  by  fear,  enticing  the  rich, 
and  robbing  the  poor. 

This  is  by  no  means  the  metliotl  of  the  ancients  or  conform- 
able to  the  intentions  of  the  sages.  When  the  sages  undertook 
soiuetliing,  they  first  based  it  on  justice,  and,  after  tlie  moral  side 
of  the  question  had  been  settled,  thvy  determined  it  by  divination 
to  prove  tliat  it  was  not  of  their  own  invention,  and  showed  that 
ghosts  and  spirits  were  of  the  samo  opitiion,  and  concurred  with 
their  view.  They  wished  to  prevail  upon  all  the  subjects  to  trust 
iu  the.  usefulness  of  divination  and  not  to  doubt.  Therefore  the 
S/ntking  speaks  of  the  seven  kinds  of  divination  by  shells1  and  the 
Yiking  of  the  eight  diagrams.  Yet  those  who  make  use  of  them, 
are  not  necfssarily  happy,  or  those  who  neglect  tliem,  unhappy. 

Happy  and  unhappy  events  are  detennined  by  time,  the 
moments  of  birth  ami  death,  by  desHny.  Human  destiny  depends 
on  Heaven,  luck  and  misfortune  lie  hidden  iu  the  lap  of  time.  If 
their  allotted  span  be  short,  people's  conduct  may  be  ever  so  virtuous. 
Heaven  cannot  lengthen  their  span,  and,  if  this  span  be  long.  Heaven 
cannot  snatcli  it  away  from  them,  though  their  doings  be  evil. 

Heaven  is  tlie  master  of  the  hundred  spirits.  Religion,  virtue, 
kindness,  and  justice  are  the  principles  of  Heaven,  trembling  and 
fear,  heavenly  emotions.2  Tlie  destruction  of  religion  and  the  sub- 
version of  virtue  are  attacks  upon  the  priuciples  of  Heaven:  men- 
aces and  angry  looks  ar，、  antagonistic  to  the  mind  of  Heaven. 

>  Shuking,  Hung^fan  Pt.  V，  Bk.  IV，  23  {Leggt  Vol.  Ill,  Pt  II,  p.  335).  By 
another  paiictuatiou  tlie  coinmeiitators  bring  out  another  meaning  viz,  that  there  are 
seven  modes  of  divination  in  all,  five  given  by  the  tortoise  and  two  by  milfoil. 

2  Wc  must  not  suppose  that  Heaven  can  fear  atid  tremble,  for,  as  Wang 
Ch'ung  tells  us  over  and  over  again,  Heaven  is  unconscious  and  inactive.  It  possesses 
those  qualities  ascribed  to  it  only  virtually.  They  become  actual  and  are  put  into 
practice  by  man,  who  fulfils  the  cutntuands  of  Heaven  with  trembling  awe.  its  moral 
feelings  are  licavenly  principles  and  heavenly  emotioiw.    Cf.  p.  129. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences. 


527 


Among  the  irreligious  arid  wicked  none  were  worse  than  Chieh 
and  Chou,  and  among  the  lawless  and  unprincipled  of  the  world 
none  were  worse  than  Yu  and  Li.1  Yet  Chieh  and  Chou  did  not 
(lie  early,  and  Yu  and  Li  were  not  cut  off  in  their  prime.  Ergo 
it  is  evident  that  happiness  and  joy  do  not  depend  on  the  choice 
of  a  lucky  day  and  the  avoidance  of  an  unpropitious  time,  and 
that  sufferings  and  hardships  are  not  the  result  of  a  collision  with 
a  bad  year  or  an  infelicitous  month. 

Cou/uctus  has  said,  "  Life  and  deatli  are  determined  by  fate, 
wealth  and  honour  depend  on  Heaven."2  In  case,  however,  that 
certain  times  and  days  are  to  be  observed,  and  that  there  are 
really  noxious  influences,  wlierrfore  did  the  sage  hesitate  to  say 
so,  or  why  was  he  afraid  to  mention  it?  According  to  the  ancient 
writings  scholars  liave  been  enjoying  peace  or  been  in  jeopardy, 
thousands  of  princes  and  tvn  thousands  of  officials  have  either 
obtained  or  lost  luck  or  mishap,  their  offices  liave  bet'a  high  or 
low,  their  emoluments  have  intn-easetl  or  dimiuisl"'(l，  and  in  all 
this  there  have  been  many  degrees  and  difl'erencea.  Taking  care 
of  their  property,  some  people  have  become  rich,  others  poor,  they 
have  made  profits,  or  suffered  losses,  their  lives  have  been  long  or 
short,  in  brief,  some  have  got  on,  while  others  remained  behind. 
The  exalted  and  noble  liave  not  selected  lucky  days  in  all  their 
doings,  nor  have  the  mean  and  ignoble  cliosen  an  unlucky  time. 

From  this  we  learn  that  happiness  and  unhappiness  as  well 
as  life  and  rleatli  tlo  not  depend  on  the  lucky  auguries  wliicli 
people  encounter,  or  on  tlie  time  of  ill  omen  or  dread,  wliith  wliich 
they  fall  in.  While  alive,  men  are  nurtured  by  their  vital  fluid, 
and,  wlien  they  expire,  their  life  \a  cut  off.  During  their  lives 
people  do  not  meet  with  a  special  luck  or  joy,  nor  can  it  he  said 
that  at  their  deaths  tliey  fall  iti  witli  an  ominous  time  of  dread. 
Taking  Confucius  as  a  witness  and  basing  our  argi""ents  on  life 
and  death,  wo  oonu*  to  tlie  conclusion  that  the  mauifold  misfortunes 
and  calamities  are  not  brought  about  by  human  actions. 

('"nf'icitts  is  a  sage  and  a  store  of  knowledge.  Life  and  death 
are  the  greatest  events.  These  great  events  prove  tlie  justness  of 
our  theory.  ( 'onfuchis  lias  declared  tliat  life  and  death  are  deter- 
mined by  destiny,  and  tliat  \v<*altl»  arid  honour  depend  on  Heaven. 
All  the  writings  and  covert  attacks  cannot  invalidate  tliis  dictum, 
and  coinmou  and  \veak-mind«'d  people  cannot  controvert  it.  Our 

1  Two  emperors  of  the  Chou  dynasty  of  bad  repute.  1'u  Wa»y  reigned  from 
781  to  77〗 B.r.,  U  Wang  from  87S  to  828  b.c. 

2  Cf.  p. 


Digitized  by  Google 


528 


Lun-Heng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


happiness  and  unhappiness  in  this  world  are  fixed  by  fate,  but 
we  can  attract  them  ourselves  by  our  actions. 1  If  people  lead  a 
tranquil  and  inactive  life,  happiness  and  misfortune  arrive  of  their 
own  accord.  That  is  fate.  If  they  do  business  and  work,  and 
luck  or  mishap  fall  to  tlieir  lot,  they  have  themselves  been  in- 
strumental. 

Very  few  of  the  human  diseases  have  not  been  caused  by 
wind,  moisture,  eating  or  drinking.  Having  exposed  tjiemselves  to 
a  draught,  or  slept  in  a  damp  place,  people  spend  their  cash  to 
learn,  which  evil  influence  has  been  at  play.  When  they  have 
overeaten  themselves,  they  rid  their  vital  essence  from  this  calamity 
l)y  abstinence,  but,  iu  case  the  malady  cannot  be  cured,  they  be- 
lieve that  the  noxious  influence  has  not  been  detected,  and,  if  their 
life  comes  to  a  close  of  itself,  tliey  maintain  that  the  divining 
straws  have  not  been  well  explained.  This  is  the  wisdom  of 
common  people. 

Among  the  three  hundred  and  sixty  naked  animals2  man 
ranks  first;  he  is  a  creature,  among  the  ten  thousand  creatures 
the  most  intelligent.  He  obtains  his  life  from  Heaven  and  his 
fluid  from  the  primordial  vapours  in  exactly  the  saiuc  manner  as 
other  creatures.  Birds  have  their  nests  and  eyries,  beasts  their 
dens  and  burrows,  reptiles,  fish,  and  scaly  creatures  their  holes, 
just  as  man  has  cottages  and  liouses,  high-storied  buildings  and 
towers. 

Those  moving  creatures  die  and  suffer  injuries,  fall  ill  and 
become  worn  out,  and  the  big  and  the  small  ones  prey  upon  one 
another,  or  man  huuts  and  seizes  them  as  a  welcome  game  for  his 
mouth  and  belly.  Tliey  do  not  miss  the  proper  time  in  building 
their  nests  and  burrowing  their  hollows,  or  fall  in  with  unlucky 
days  in  rambling  east  and  west.  Man  has  hirth  and  death,  and 
so  other  creatures  have  a  beginning  and  an  end.  He  is  active,  and 
so  other  creatures  have  their  work  likewise.  Their  arteries,  heads, 
feet,  ears,  eyes,  noses,  and  mouths  are  not  dilTerent  from  the  humau, 
only  tlieir  likes  and  dislikes  are  not  the  same  as  the  human, 
lience  man  does  not  know  their  sounds,  nor  understand  their 
meaning.  They  associate  witli  tlieir  kindred  and  consort  with  their 
flock,  and  know,  when  they  can  come  near,  and  when  tliey  must 
keep  away  just  like  man.  They  have  tho  same  heaven,  the  same 
earth,  aud  tliey  look  equally  up  at  the  sun  and  the  moon.  There- 


Even  in  that  case  there  is  fate,  which  includes  human  activity. 

Snakes,  reptiles,  and  worms  which  like  man  have  no  scales,  fnr,  or  feathers. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences. 


fore  one  does  not  see  the  reason,  why  the  mistbrtune  caused  by 
demons  and  spirits  should  fall  upon  man  aloue,  and  not  on  the 
other  creatures.  In  man  tlie  mind  of  Ileaveu  and  Earth  reach  their 
highest  development.  Why  do  the  heavenly  disasters  strike  the 
noblest  creature  and  not  the  mean  ones?  How  is  it  that  their 
natures  are  so  similar,  and  their  fates  so  tliHVi'ent? 

Punishments  are  not  inllicted  ujmn  high  officials,  and  wise 
emperors  are  U'nient  towards  the  nobility.  Wise  emperors  punish 
tlie  plebeians,  but  not  the  patricians,  and  the  spirits  visit  the  noblest 
creature  with  calamities  and  spare  the  meau  ones?  This  would 
not  tally  witli  a  passage  in  the  Yiking  to  the  effect  that  a  great 
man  sliares  the  luck  and  mishap  of  demons  and  spirits.1 

W  ht*n  I  have  committed  some  offence  and  fallen  into  the 
clutches  of  the  law,  or  become  liable  to  a  capital  punishment,  they 
<lo  not  say  that  it  has  been  niv  own  fault,  but  tliat  in  my  house 
some  duty  has  hcen  neglfctetl.  When  I  have  not  taken  the  neces- 
sary precautions  for  my  personal  accommodation,  or  when  I  have 
beeu  immoderate  in  rating  or  drinking,  they  do  not  say  that  I 
have  been  careless,  l>ut  discover  some  impordonable  clis regard  of 
an  unlucky  time.  In  caso  several  persons  die  shortly  one-  after  the 
other,  sr>  that  there  are  uj>  to  ten  roHins  awaiting  burial,  tliey  do 
not  speak  of  a  contagion  tlirou^li  contaminated  air,  but  urge  that 
the  day  chusen  for  one  interment  has  been  unlucky.  If  some 
activity  lias  been  displayed,  they  will  talk  about  the  non-observance 
of  lucky  or  unlucky  days,  and.  if  nothing  lias  been  done,  they 
have  recourse  to  one's  habitation.  Our  house  or  lodging  being 
in  a  state  of  decay  ("'  dilapidation,  flying  goblins  and  floating 
spectres  assemble  in  our  residence,  they  say.  Tliey  also  pray  to 
tlieir  ancestors  for  help  against  misfortunes  and  delivery  from  evil. 
In  case  of  sickness,  they  do  not  ask  a  doctor  and,  when  they  are 
in  difficulties,  they  do  not  reform  their  conduct.  They  ascribe 
everything  to  misfortune  and  call  it  offences  or  mistakes.  Sucli  is 
the  type  of  tlie  ordinary  run:  their  knowledge  is  shallow,  and  they 
never  get  at  the  bottom  of  a  thing. 

When  delinquents  are  employed  by  tlie  Minister  of  Works 
for  hard  labour,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  day,  when  they  ap- 
peared bef«)re  the  judge,  was  inauspicious,  or  that  the  time,  when 
they  were  condeuined  to  penal  servitude,  was  one  of  ill  omen.  If 
a  murderer  selects  an  auspicious  day  to  go  out  and  meet  the  judge, 
who  inflicts  his  punishment,  and  if  he  chooses  a  good  time  for 

1   Yik'ing,  1st  diagram  (Ch'ien). 
Lun  -  Ueag.  34 


Digitized  by  Google 


530 


Lun-Ht  ng:  P.  Folklore  and  Heligion. 


entering  the  prison,  will  the  judgment  then  be  reversed,  aod  his 
pardon  arrive? 

A  man  is  not  punished,  unless  be  has  met  with  mishap,  nor 
thrown  into  jail,  if  not  punished.  Should  one* day  a  decree  arrive, 
in  consequence  of  which  he  could  walk  out  released  from  his  fet- 
ters, it  would  not  follow  that  he  had  got  rid  of  evil  influences. 

There  are  thousands  of  jails  in  the  world,  and  in  these  jails 
are  ten  thousands  of  prisoners,  but  they  caunot  all  have  neglected 
the  precarious  time  of  dread.  Those  who  hold  office  and  have 
their  revenues,  perhaps  from  special  towns  and  districts,  wliicli 
have  been  given  them  in  perpetual  fief,  number  thousands  and  tens 
of  thousands,  but  tlie  days,  when  they  change  their  residencea, 
are  not  always  lucky. 

The  city  of  Li-yang 1  was  flooded  (luring  one  night  and  be- 
came a  lake.  Its  inhabitants  cannot  all  have  been  guilty  of  a  dis- 
regard of  tlie  year  and  the  months.  When  Kao  Tsu  rose,  VSng  and 
Pf«s  were  recovered,  yet  their  inhabitants  cauuot  be  said  to  have 
been  particularly  cautious  with  reference  to  times  and  days.  Wheu 
Hsiang  Ya  stormed  Hsiaiig-an,  no  living  soul  was  left  in  it.3  This 
does  not  prove,  however,  that  its  people  have  not  prayed  or  wor- 
shipped. The  army  of  Chao  was  buried  alive  by  Cli'm  below  CU ang- 
ping.  400,000  men  died  at  the  same  time  together.4  When  they 
left  home,  they  had  surely  not  omitted  to  clioosc  a  propitious  time. 

On  a  shm  day  one  must  not  cry,  for  crying  entails  deep  sorrow. 
When  souu'  one  dies  on  a  trw  or  a  chi  day,  other  deaths  will  follow, 
yet  in  case  an  entire  family  dies  out,  the  first  death  did  not  of 
necessity  take  place  on  a  shin,  wu,  or  chi 5  clay.  On  a  day,  when 
blood-shed  is  forbidden,  one  must  not  kill  animals,  yet  the  abattoirs 
are  not  scenes  of  more  misfortunes  than  other  places.  On  the  first 
day  of  the  moon,  people  should  not  crowd  together,  yet  shops  are 
not  especially  visited  with  disasters.  When  skeletons  become  visible 
on  the  surface  of  the  soil,  they  have  not  necessarily  come  out  on 
a  Wang^wang  day,  and  a  dead  man,  whose  cofBn  is  standing  in  a 
house,  must  not  just  have  returned  on  a  Kuei-chi  day.0  Consequently 

i  Vid.  p.  136. 
a  Cf.  p.  185. 

•  The  Shi-chi  chap.  8,  p.  11  v.,  where  this  passage  occurs  {Chavanncs,  Mem. 
Hist.  Vol.  II,  p.  343).  speaks  of  the  city  of  HMatig-ching  in  Ho'ian,  whereas  Hmang-an 
is  situated  in  Atihui. 

4  Cf.  p.  136. 

*  Three  cyclical  numbers. 

8  On  a  \Vang-%cang  day  one  mast  not  go  out,  and  on  a  Kuei-ehi  day  returning 
home  ia  desastrous. 


Digitized  by  Google 


Criticisms  on  Noxious  Influences. 


5:n 


those  、vl",  interpret  evil  influences  cannot  be  trusted,  for  if  they 
are,  they  do  not  find  the  truth. 

Now,  let  us  suppose  that  ten  persons  living  and  eating  together 
in  the  same  house  do  not  move  a  lioe  or  a  hammer,  nor  change 
their  residence,  that  in  saoritieing  and  marrying  they  select  but 
lucky  days,  and  that  from  Spring  to  Winter  they  never  come  into 
collision  with  any  inauspicious  time.  Would  these  ten  persons  not 
die,  when  they  have  attained  a  hundred  years  ？ 

The  geomaucere  will  certainly  reply  that  their  house  would 
either  be  in  good  repair  or  corainence  to  decay,  and  that,  on  the 
S»i-p  o  or  Chih-fn  days  they  would  not  think  of  leaving  it.  In  that 
case  they  might  every  now  and  then  ask  the  soothsayers  about  the 
state  of  their  "house  and  remain  in  it,  as  long  as  it  is  iu  good 
repair,  but  leave  it,  when  it  begins  to  delapidate,  and,  on  the  Sui- 
p  o  and  ChUi-fu 1  days,  the  whole  family  might  move.  But  would 
they  not  die  then  at  the  age  of  a  hundred  years? 

The  geoinancers  would  again  object  that  while  chauging  their 
residence  they  would  hit  upou  an  unlucky  time,  or  that  their  moving 
to  and  fro  might  be  unpropitious.  Then  we  would  advise  them 
to  consult  the  seers  and  not  to  move,  unless  tliey  can  safely  go, 
nor  revert,  imless  their  coming  is  without  danger.  But  would  they 
remain  alive  then  after  liaving  reached  a  hundred  years? 

The  geomancers  would  not  fail  to  reply  that  life  stops  and 
that  age  has  a  limit.  Ergo  human  life  and  death  solely  depend 
on  destiny ;  they  are  not  affected  by  unlucky  years  and  months, 
or  influenced  by  a  disregard  of  fatal  days  of  dread. 

i  Wang-wanp,  Kuei-chi,  Sui-p'o,  and  Chxh-fu 往亡， 歸忌， 歲破， 
I 貪 符  ^  "clinical  terms  used  by  geoniancer8  and  in  calendars  to  designate 
certain  classes  of  unlucky  days. 


34* 


Digitized  by  Google 


532 


Liiii-Hong:  F.  Folklore  and  Hcligion. 


CHAPTER  XUV. 
On  Exorcism  (Chieh-chu). 

The  world  believes  in  sacrifices,  trusting  that  they  procure 
happiness,  and  it  approves  of  exorcism,  fancying  that  it  will  re- 
move evil  influences.  Exorcism  begins  with  the  ceremony  of  pre- 
senting an  offering.  An  offering  is  like  a  banquet  given  by  the 
living  to  their  guests.  First  the  ghosts  are  treated  like  guests  and 
given  a  meal,  but,  when  tlioy  have  oaten  it,  they  are  expelled  with 
swords  and  sticks.  Provided  that  gliosts  and  spirits  possess  con- 
sciousness, they  would  undubitably  resent  such  a  treatment,  offering 
resistence  ami  lighting,  and  would  refuse  to  leave  forthwith.  In 
their  anger,  tlicy  would  just  cause  misfortune.  If  tliey  are  not 
conscious,  then  they  cannot  do  miscliief.  In  that  case  exorcising 
would  be  no  use,  and  its  omission  would  do  no  harm. 

Moreover,  what  sliape  do  people  ascribe  to  gliosts  and  spirits? 
If  they  believe  them  to  have  a  shape,  this  shape  must  be  like 
that  of  living  men.  Living  men  in  a  passion  would  certainly  make 
an  attempt  upon  tin-  lives  of  their  adversaries.  If  they  have  uo 
shape,  they  would  be  like  mist  and  clouds.  The  expulsion  of 
(•buds  and  mist,  however,  would  prove  ineffectual. 

As  we  cannot  know  tht'ir  shapes,  we  can  neither  guess  their 
feelings.  For  what  purpose  would  ghosts  and  spirits  gather  in  human 
dwellings?  In  case  tliey  earnestly  wish  to  kill  people,  they  、、丁 ukl 
avoid  their  aggressors,  when  they  drive  them  out,  and  abscond,  but, 
as  soon  as  tlie  expulsion  ceases,  they  would  return,  and  re-occupy 
their  former  places.  Should  they  have  no  murderous  intentions, 
and  only  like  to  dwell  in  human  houses,  they  would  cause  no  in- 
jury, even  if  they  were  not  expelled. 

"When  grandees  go  out,  thousands  of  people  assemble  to  liave 
a  look  at  them,  throning  the  streets  and  filling  the  alleys,  and 
striving  for  tlie  places  in  fionr.  It  is  not  before  the  soldiers  repel 
tliein,  that  they  go  away,  but  no  sooner  have  tlie  soldiers  turm'«l 
their  back,  than  they  return  to  their  plaws.  Unless  the  soldiers 
kept  watch  the  whole  day  without  leaving  their  post,  they  could 
not  restrain  them,  because  they  are  bent  on  having  a  look  and 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Exorcism! 


5H3 


would  not  go  home  on  account  of  having  been  driven  back  once. 
Provided  that  ghosts  and  spirits  resemble  living  men,  they  would 
feel  attracted  to  their  homes  in  the  same  way  as  those  thousands 
are  determined  on  sight  seeing.  If  the  soldiers  repelliiig  them  do 
not  keep  watcli  for  a  long  while,  the  Iookere-on  do  not  disperse, 
and  unless  expelled  during  a  whole  year,  the  ghosts  would  not 
leave.  Now,  being  expelled,  alter  tlicy  have  finished  their  meal, 
tliey  would  retire,  but  having  retired,  come  back  again,  for  wliat 
could  prevent  them? 

When  grain  is  being  dried  in  a  court-yard,  and  fowls  and 
sparrows  pick  it  up,  they  escape,  when  the  master  drives  them 
off,  but  return,  when  he  relaxes  his  vigilance.  lie  is  unable  to 
keep  the  fowls  and  sparrows  at  hay,  unless  lie  watclies  the  whole 
day.  If  the  ghosts  be  spirits,  an  expulsion  would  not  induce  them  to 
retreat,  and  if  they  be  not  spirits,  they  would  lx»  like  fowls  and  spji r- 
ro、vs，  and  nothing  but  a  constant  repulse  could  frighten  them  away. 

When  tigers  and  wolves  enter  into  a  territory,  tl"'y  are  pur- 
sued with  bows  and  t*ross-bo\\  s.  but  even  their  deaths  do  not  do 
away  with  tlie  cause  of  those  terrible  visits.  When  brigands  and 
insurgents  assault  a  city,  tlie  imperial  troops  may  b«'at  them,  but 
notwitbstauding  this  rebulf*.  the  cause,  of  their  frightful  incursions 
is  not  removed  thereby.  The  arrival  of  tigers  and  wolves  cor- 
responds to  a  disorganised  government,  that  of  rebels  and  bandits, 
to  a  general  disorder.  Thus  the  gatliering  of  ghosts  and  spirits 
is  indicative  of  tlie  sudden  end  of  life.  By  destroying  tigers  and 
wolves  and  by  defeating  insurgents  ami  bandits  one  cannot  bring 
about  a  refonn  of  tlie  government  or  re-establish  order,  neither  is 
it  possible  to  remove  misfortune  or  prolong  life  by  ever  so  much 
exorcising  or  expelling  ghosts  and  spirits. 

Sick  people  sec  ghosts  appear,  when  tln*ir  disease  has  reached 
its  climax.  Those  who  are  of  a  strong  and  violent  character  will 
grasp  the  sword  or  the  cudgel  and  fight  with  the  ghosts.  They 
will  have  one  or  two  rounds,  until  at  last,  having  missed  a  thrust, 
they  are  forced  to  surrender,  for,  unless  they  surrender,  the  duel 
will  not  come  to  a  close.  The  ghosts  expelled  by  exorcism  are 
not  different  from  those  perceived  by  sick  people,  nor  is  tliore  any 
difference  between  expelling  and  fighting.  As  the  ghost's  will  not 
withdraw  though  assailed  by  sick  people,  the  conjurations  of  the 
master  of  tlie  house  will  not  prevail  upon  the  ghosts  and  spirits  to 
leave.  Consequently  of  what  use  would  be  such  ('onju rations  for 
the  house?  Therefore  we  cannot  accept  tlie  belief  that  evil  influ- 
ences might  thus  be  neutralised. 


Digitized  by  Google 


534 


Lun-Heng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


Furtliermort1,  the  ghosts  which  are  expelled  from  the  house 
live  there  as  guests.   The  hosts  are  the  Twelve  Spirits  of  the  house, 


spirits  occupying  the  Twelve  Cardinal  Points.1  The  Dragon  and 
the  Tiger  are  fierce  spirits  and  the  chief  ghosts  of  heaven.2  Flying 
corpses  and  floating  goblins  would  not  venture  to  gather  against 
their  will,  as,  when  a  host  is  tierce  and  bold,  mischievous  guests 
would  not  dare  to  intrude  upon  him.  Now  the  Twelve  Spirits  have 
admitted  the  others  into  the  house,  and  the  master  drives  them 
away.  That  would  be  nothing  less  than  throwing  out  the  guests 
of  the  Twelve  Spirits.  Could  such  a  hatred  against  the  Twelve 
Spirits  secure  happiness?  If  there  are  no  Twelve  Spirits,  there  are 
no  flying  corpses  or  goblins  either,  and  without  spirits  and  goblins 
exorcism  would  be  of  do  avail,  and  the  expulsion  have  no  sense. 

Exorcism  is  an  imitation  of  the  old  ceremony  of  the  expulsion 
of  sickness.  In  ancient  time*  Chuan  Hsfl  had  three  sons,  who 
vanished,  when  they  had  grown  up.  One  took  up  his  abode  in 
the  water  of  the  Ynngtse  and  became  the  < rhost  of  Ferers  one  lived 
in  the  Jo  River  and  became  a  Water  Sjnril,  and  one  in  damp  and 
wet  corners  as  the  arbiter  of  sickness.3  At  the  end  of  the  year, 
when  all  business  had  been  finished,  sick  people  used  to  drive  out 
the  Spirit  of  Sickness,  and  believed  that  by  seeing  off  the  old  year 
and  going  to  meet  the  new  one  they  would  obtain  luck.  The 
world  followed  tliis  example,  whence  originated  exorcism.  But 
even  the  ceremony  of  driving  out  sickness  is  out  of  place. 

When  Yao  and  Shun  practised  their  virtue,  the  empire  enjoyed 
perfect  peace,  the  manifold  calamities  vanished,  and,  tl tough  the 
diseases  were  not  driven  out,  the  Spirit  of  Sickness  did  not  make 
its  appearance.  When  Chieh  and  Chou  did  their  deeds,  everything 
within  the  seas  was  thrown  into  confusion,  all  the  raisfortune8 
happened  simultaneously,  and  although  the  diseases  were  expelled 
day  by  day,  the  Spirit  of  Sickness  still  came  back.  Declining  ages 
have  faith  in  ghosts,  and  tlie  unintelligent  will  pray  for  happiness. 
When  tlie  Chou  were  going  to  ruin,  the  people  believed  in  ghosts, 
and  prepared  sacrifices  with  the  object  of  imploring  happiness  and 
tlie  divine  help.    Narrow-minded  rulers  fell  an  easy  prey  to  im- 

1  In  addition  to  the  Blue  Dragon  and  White  Tiger  Wang  CKung  mentions 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Exorcism. 


5M5 


posture,  and  took  no  heed  of  their  own  actions,  but  they  ac- 
complished nothing  creditable,  and  their  administration  remained 
unsettled. 

All  depends  upon  man,  and  not  on  ghosts,  on  their  virtue, 
and  not  on  sacrifices.  The  end  of  a  State  is  far  or  near,  and 
human  life  is  long  or  short.  If  by  offerings,  happiness  could  be 
obtained,  or  if  misfortune  could  be  removed  by  exorcism,  kings 
might  use  up  all  the  treasures  of  the  world  for  the  celebration  of 
sacrifices  to  procrastinate  the  end  of  their  reign,  and  old  men  and 
women  of  rich  families  might  pray  for  the  happiness  to  be  gained 
by  conjurations  with  the  purpose  of  obtaining  an  age  surpassing 
the  usual  span. 

Long  and  short  life,  wealth  and  honour  of  all  the  mortals 
are  determined  by  fortune  and  destiny,  and  as  for  their  actions, 
whether  they  prove  successful  or  otherwise,  there  are  times  of 
prosperity  and  decline.  Sacrifices  do  not  procure  happiness,  for 
happiness  does  not  depend  on  oblations.  But  the  world  believes 
in  ghosts  and  spirits,  and  therefore  is  partial  to  sacrifices.  Since 
there  are  no  ghosts  and  spirits  to  receive  these  sacrifices,  the 
knowing  do  not  concern  themselves  about  them. 

Sacrifices  are  meant  as  a  kindness  done  to  the  ghosts  and 
spirits,  and  yet  they  do  not  briog  about  luck  and  happiness.  Now 
fancy  that  these  spirits  are  expelled  by  brute  force.  Could  that 
bring  any  profit? 

The  sacrificial  rites  and  the  methods  of  exorcism  are  very 
numerous.  We  will  prove  their  uselessness  by  one  example,  for 
from  a  small  sacrifice  one  may  draw  a  conclusion  to  the  great 
ones,  and  from  one  ghost  learn  to  know  the  hundred  spirits. 

When  people  have  finished  the  building  of  a  house  or  a 
cottage,  excavated  the  ground,  or  dug  up  the  earth,  they  propitiate 
the  Spirit  of  Earth,  after  the  whole  work  has  been  completed, 
and  call  this  appeasing  the  earth.  They  make  an  earthen  figure 
to  resemble  a  ghost.  The  wizards  chant  their  prayers  to  reconcile 
the  Spirit  of  Earth,  and,  when  the  sacrifice  is  over,  they  become 
gay  and  cheerful,  and  pretend  that  the  ghosts  and  spirits  have 
been  propitiated,  and  misfortunes  and  disasters  removed.  But  if 
we  get  to  the  buttom  of  it,  we  find  that  all  this  is  illusive. 

Why?  Because  the  material  earth  is  like  the  human  body. 
Everything  under  heaven  forms  one  body,  whose  head  and  feet 
are  tens  of  thousands  of  Li  apart.  Mankind  lives  upou  earth  as 
fleaa  and  lice  stick  to  the  human  body.  Fleas  and  lice  feed  upon 
man,  and  torment  his  skin,  as  men  tlig  up  the  earth,  and  torment 


Digitized  by  Google 


Lun-Hpng:  F.  Folklore  and  Religion. 


its  body.  Should  some  among  the  fleas  and  lice,  being  aware  of 
this,  wish  to  appease  man's  heart,  and  for  that  purpose  assemble 
to  propitiate  him  near  the  flesli,  which  they  have  eaten,  would 
man  know  about  it?  Man  cannot  comprehend  what  fleas  and  lice 
say,  as  Earth  does  not  understand  the  speech  of  man. 

The  Hn  and  the  YiU>h  have  the  same  ears  and  mouths,  and 
are  animated  by  similar  feelings,  but  even  if  they  speak  mouth  to 
mouth,  and  ear  to  ear,  they  tannot  understand  each  other.  And 
there  should  he  a  comiminication  between  the  ears  and  the  mouth 
of  Earth  and  man,  who  does  not  resemble  her? 

Moreover,  wlio  is  it  that  hears  wliat  man  says?  Should  it 
be  Karth,  lier  ears  are  too  i'ar  away  to  hear,  and  if  it  be  the 
earth  of  one  sp»«c-ial  house,  this  t'artli  is  like  an  atom  of  human 
flesh,  liow  could  it  understand  anything?  If  the  spirit  of  the 
liouso  be  tlie  hearer,  one  ou^ht  to  speak  of  appeasinj;  the  house, 
but  not  of  appeasing  Earth. 

The  Kites  prescribe  that  entering  into  the  ancestral  hall  one 
must  not  find  a  master  there.1  One  lias  made  the  device  of  cutting 
a  wooden  tablet,  one  foot  and  two  inches  long,  and  calling  it  the 
master,  and  serves  it  in  the  spirit,  hut  does  not  make  a  human 
likeness.  Now  at  the  propitiatory  sacrifices  to  Earth,  they  make 
an  eartlien  human  figure  resembling  tlie  shape  of  a  ghost.  How 
could  that  have  a  propitiatory  t'flVct?  Spirits  are  diffuse,  vague, 
and  incorporeal :  entering  and  departing  tliey  nectl  no  aperture, 
whence  their  name  of  spirits.  Now  to  make  a  bodily  image  is 
not  only  in  opposition  to  the  Rites,  but  also  reveals  a  misapj»re- 
hension  <>f  the  nature  of  spirits.  We  know  that  tliey  have  no  like- 
ness, therefore,  when  the  mats  are  spread  for  sacrifice,  no  figures 
of  ghosts  are  put  up. 

If  at  tlio  propitiatory  service  for  Earth  tliey  set  up  human 
figures,  could  a  stone  efli^y  be  used  at  the  sacrifice  to  the  Moun- 
tains, or  could  a  wooden  man  be  made  for  the  sacrifice  to  the 
dates  and  Doors'? 2 

When  Cliung  Hang  Yin  of  Chiu 3  was  near  his  end,  he  sum- 
moned his  high-priest,  wishing  to  punish  him.  "  The  victims." 
said  lie.  "  which  you  have  immolated  for  me.  liave  not  been  fat 
and  glossy.  You  have  not  observed  the  rules  of  fasting  with  rever- 
ence, and  thus  have  caused  the  ruin  of  my  State.    Is  it  not  so? " 

1  The  image  of  the  departed,  wlio  as  master  dwells  in  the  ancestral  hall. 
1  No  figures  are  used  at  the  sacrifices  to  those  deities. 
3  A  nobleman,  related  to  the  ducal  house  of  ( 'hin,  of  the  5th  cent.  b.c.  The 
Ch'ung  //nn//  family  posse.ised  large  domains  in  Chin. 


Digitized  by  Google 


On  Exorcism- 


537 


The  priest  replied  in"  plain  terms,  "  Formerly,  my  old  lord, 
Cltung  Hong  Mi  Tse,  possessed  ten  cliariots,  and  did  not  foi»l  grieved 
at  their  small  number,  but  at  the  insufHciency  of  liis  righteousness. 
Your  Lordship  has  a  luindred  war-chariots,  and  does  not  feel  dis- 
tressed that  your  justice  is  so  imperfect,  but  merely  regrets  that 
your  chariote  do  not  sui'licv.  Wlien  vessels  and  chariots  are  well 
etjuipped,  the  taxes  must  be  high,  and  the  taxes  being  heavy,  the 
people  (U-farnc  and  curse  their  sovereign.  If  1"'  tlien  offers  sacri- 
fices, of  what  use  (.an  it  be  to  his  State?  These  curses  must  also 
ruin  the  .State.  — One  man  prays  for  him,  and  the  whole  Stat*' 
curses  him.  One  prayer  cannot  overcome  ten  thousarul  (,urses.  Is 
it  not  quite  natural  that  a  State  should  perish  thus?  What  is  tlio 
guilt  of  the  priest  ? (  Hung  Hukj  Yin  tlien  felt  ash.iiiu'd. 

The  people  of  to-day  rely  on  sacrifices  like  Ch  ung  Hang  Yin. 
TIh'V  do  not  improve  their  conduct,  but  multiply  the  prayers,  do 
nor  honour  their  superiors,  but  fear  the  ^lutsts.  When  they  die, 
or  misfortune  befalls  them,  tlicy  ascribe  it  to  noxious  influences, 
maintaining  that  tliey  have  not  yet  been  regulated.  When  tliey 
liave  been  regulated  and  offerings  prepared,  and  misfortunes  are 
as  numerous  as  before,  and  do  not  cease,  they  make  the  sacrifices 
answerable,  declaring  that  they  have  not  bevn  per  formed  with 
sufficient  reverence. 

As  regards  exorcism,  exorcism  is  of  no  use,  and  as  regards 
sacrifices,  sacrifices  are  of  no  avail.  As  respects  wizards  and 
priests,  wizards  and  priests  Imve  no  power,  for  it  is  plain  that 
all  depends  upon  man,  aud  not  on  gliosts.  on  his  virtue,  and  uot 
on  sacrifices. 


Digitized  by  Google 


538 


Index  of  Subjects. 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


A. 


Ac ii  pun c  tn  rr  ^ 


Al  tenia t ion  of  nature  nnd  culture, 
prosperity  nnd  decay,  474. 

A  in  u  lets  and  charms 蘭服 牙身， 
hoys  wear  jade-stones,  girls  pearls, 
alii. 

A  n  ces  tra  1  tablet  zp  "l'、v<、u(l，  tuir 

foot  two  inches  lon<;,  •、: 化- 
AiH'icnt  chararters        /J^",  44K,  1">.'>, 
A  !i  gels,  informing  the  Spirit  of  Heaven 
of  Iniman  inisdee<ls,  29 1  >  a  fallen 

a '― 斤仙， 就 
A  n  i  in  a  1  s t  are  creatures  like  man,  2 SO, 

the  killing  of  animals  is  wicked,  end. 

Antli  ro  poscopy  a  ml  physiognomy 
fj* 相， Cha,,.  XXIV. 

Anti-alcoholic  memorial,  HH. 

Antidotes,  how  given,  1">S. 

Antiquarians  know  how  tr»  de- 
termine the  a^e  of  old  swords,  34;">. 

Antiqui  ty ,  overestimated  by  scholars 
nnd  artists,  47^5. 

A  ]» paritions  ,    "itl"、r  gl"'sts 

siiaped  like  men,  or  men  behaving 
like  ghosts,  232,  '244. 

Army  4,000  men,  di\  idrd  into 

2  divisions  師. 
Ascension  to  heaven  by  the  soul,  '22s, 
of  Huang  7Y，  of  Huai  Nan  Tsry 

:m 

Auspicious  grain       *^|^,  323, 
B. 

Kallista        of  ten  st"nrs,498,  pulled 

with  a  windlass   *，  503. 
Beauty,  engendered  l>y  a  magical 
forre,  vicious  and  depraved,  """2 


Bird   9i,  star,  UK 

Births,  su[fternatiiinU  31H,  4H4. 

Black  Tortoise       武， the  northern 

<pindrnnt  of  solar  mansions.  10r>. 
Bl  ii  r  I)r «m>n   倉^^ ，  tlie  eastern 

(]iiadrnnt  of  solar  inansions,  106,534. 
Bron/e  vase  of  the  year  669  b.c. 

witli  inscription,  H44 
Burning  glasses  陽^^ ， 
B ii r n i ti ^  of  the  Bonks  by  Chrin 

Shih  Huang  Ti,  204,  44L  44^  12LL 

c. 

Cnutii  Iml  ism .  in  times  ofdeartli,  1  TO. 
V  v  remoni  es  originate  from  a  want 

of  loynltv,  100. 
(*hance         definition,  142.  Chap.  \. 

<  ha"s  M M )3  *2：>2- 

< ' ]|  n  ra  r  ter  *|^J:  and  natural  gifts 
tlet ermine  luuuan  intelligence  and 
conduct.  145,  Chap.  XXXI,  trans- 
formed by  instruction  and  the  in- 
fluence of  virtue,  depend  on 
tluk  (|uantitv  of  the  original  tluidf  3SI  • 

Chin  {kin) 金， old  coins,  132*  L11L 

3t;r>t  an^  ikL 

sticks         of  ivory  considered 
«i  ^reat   luxury   under  the  Shang 
dynasty,  :d 
('hroiiicle         Ik   禹 水杀已    lr "- 
pen-chi, 

Co  in  m  erce  resorted  to  by  lazy  agri- 
culturists, 170- 

《、、 n tingencies  ,  detinitiun,  142, 
contingencies  and  chauce  agree  or 
disagree  with  destiny,  123. 

<m»k，  in  Sung^  famous  for  butchery, 
丄;! I  — 


Index  of  Subjects. 


539 


Cow ,  may  give  birth  to  a  horse,  l"」- 
rreation ,  2a2. 

Cricket  and  chrysalis  no  einblein  of 

immortality,  12i 
Cries  of  a  new-born  child  indicative 

of  the  length  of  its  life, 
Cross-how  25 K  2ti<).  m. 

D. 

Days  and  niglits,  their  diflerent 
lengths  how  caused,  259. 

Death 死， rimp.  XV，dcath  th(*  corre- 
late of  birth, 

Destiny 命， Chap.  VIII  and 】X, 
destiny  of  a  State  stronger  than 
that  of  individuals,  137,  connected 
with  the  stars,  hkL^  natural  , 

coucomitant  隨， adverse 遭， 138, 
received  at  the  time  of  conception, 
1 3!K  doi\s  not  agree  with  natural 
disposition,  good  or  bad  character, 
eod.  determines  life  and  deatl，，  rank 
nnd  wealth,  144,  not  influenced  by 
virtue  or  knowledge,  fod^  natural  de- 
stiny according  to  Mpncius*  view,  43  K 
destiny  depends  on  Heaven,  a2fL 

I)  i  p  p  e  r 斗， constellation,  275,  W). 

Diseases  have  natural  causes,  52R. 

Distance,  its  effect  on  vision,  2(?1. 
2156,  214, 

Divination  卜 ^^，  Chap.  XIV，  hy 
tortoise  shell  and  milfoil,  182.  by 
shells  and  by  diagrams,  521L 

Dragon  ^^，  attracts  the  clouds  and 
the  rain,  279,  3.V;,  fetched  by  Heaven 
during  a  tempest*  "J85.  3">  1  •  rising  to 
heaven  20 3 f  an  auspicious  animal, 
323.  ix  reptile  that  undergoes  trans- 
formations. 327,  C'hap.  XXIX,  lives 
in  the  water,  351，  like  fish  nnd 
reptiles,  represented  with  a 

liurse's  head  ami  a  snake's  tail,  353. 
mounts  the  clouds,  and  is  like  earth- 
worms and  ants,  eo<L9  reptiles  that 
can  l>e  domesticiited  and  eaten,  3'—", 


not  inlelligent*  eod.%  dragon  liver  and 
unborn  leopard,  eod,、  the  dragon 
rides  on  the  clouds,  357.  contracts 
and  expands  its  body,  can  become 
visible  and  invisible,  358.  can  trans- 
form itself,  tod. 
Dragon  Star 龍星. a2£L 
I) reams  and  visions         tl"'ir  n:itm<' 
doubtful,  200,  215.  direct  d renins, 
228.  interpretation  of  dreams,  189. 
Dwarfs,  used  ns  actors,  4?：^. 

E, 

Kagles  transformed  into  pigeons  and 
vice  verm,  -^H. 

K a  r t h  has  a  body  like  maiu 

183.  size  of  its  area,  2w6t  does  not 
move,  high  in  the  north -we^st 

and  low  in  the  south-enst,  *2<j8, 

Karth-qu ak predicted,  1 12.  Lil* 

Eclipse  ^^，  how  caused  269  sei 卜， 

High t  Diagrams  八 卦, invented 
by  Fu  Hsi,  expanded  by  WM  Wang^ 
8L  4M,  114. 

K I  i  x  i  r  of  life  之 ，  made  of 

gold  and  gems,  drunk  by  Taoists,  ILiiL 

K  mpcrors,  their  investiture  by 
Heaven,  13^  l^L 

Knergy,  luiman,  doubled  by  fear,  49S. 

Eq  ii  an  i  m  it v  of  the  wise  who  pla- 
cidly await  their  fate%  14:),  149. 

K<]ui  noxes,  vernal  and  autumnal 
分， 2^  2liiL 

Exaggerations,  why  people  are 
fond  of  them,  8o. 

P^xecu tin ns  are  wicked,  2Sn. 

Exorcism 解除， Chap.XLIV, 

F. 

Fate  see  【）esliny,  1 30,  becomes  the 
mind  internally  and  the  body  ex- 
ternally, HI,  is  obtained  spontane- 
ously, not  by  any  effort,  150,  fate 
of  long  life,  魏 


540 


Index  of  Subjects. 


1'Vliritmis  plant  liiilL 

F  <*  v  <»  r  f^t  ciin'd  with  pills  causing 
perspiration,  2H2, 

F  i  H  w  dynasties  at 
ihc  beginning  of  history,  iliL 

Fifth  month  ch ild  supposed  to  kill 
its  parents,  1BI . 

Fishes  and  birds  are  related,  both 
can  lly  nnd  nn*  oviparous,  300* 
fishes  and  turtU»s  nre  metamorphosed 
from  snakes  mxl  repiiles,  Ji2ti，  H(>8. 

H、e  Birds 五鳥 *  222, 

Five        nnns  (Classics)  ： ― 

Yikhg,  Shiking、  Shukiny^  Liki,  nn<l 
Ch'u^cKiu,        447,  449, 

Fi  vr    KI«Mnents  :— inelaK 

wood,  water,  tivt\  and  earth,  1<  '4, 

l'  ive  Em jiero rs  and  Three  Rulers 
^ff  干 ~ Iluamj  7V,   ( Iwan 

Ilsu,  A'，v,  Yao^  Shun,  nnd  lrf/,  T，a，ig、 
nnd  Wen  Wang,  I£L  HL  [01, 區 
324,  332, 现 372,  405.  4"4, 
4(iL  484^  Ml. 

I'  i  v  v  (trains 五 ― hemp,  millet, 
rice,  wheat,  and  beans,  381,  517, 

Five   La  k  j^j  ~  T' ni-hu  in 

Kiangsv^  380. 

Five  Leading  Prin cos  ^^j^J: 
Duke  Iluan  of  Ch'i,  Duke  Wen  <if 
Chin,  Duke  Jhiatuj  of  Sung,  Duke 
Chvany  of  Ch， u、  and  Duke  Mu  of 
(，h'in、  LL  LHL 

Five  Mountains  3£$訣， 、:"，red:— 
Yai-shan^  H^ng-shon%  lhta-shan,  HMg- 
shan、  and  Sung>shany  2'i  1 . 

Five  Organs  (intestines) 五^^ :- — 
the  heart,  tlie  liver,  the  stomach, 
the  lungs,  and  the  kidneys,  10,'>, 
19*),  the  necessary  substratum  of 
the  Five  Virtues,  195,  38 1 ,  regulat- 
itig  the  Vital  Fluid,  49^>. 

Five  Planetary  Km  j)cr<>rs 玉' *^， 


Five  Phi  nets  ： 一 Vemis,  Ju- 

piter, Mercury,  Mars,  and  Saturn, 
'11  \%  are  made  of  the  substance  of 
the  Five  Elements,  2ItL 

Five  Qualities 五常： 一 benevol- 
ence, justice,  propriety,  knowledge, 
； imi  truth,  38L 屬, 

Five  Sacrifiros  杀已  of  the 
house,  the  outer  and  inner  doors, 
the  well,  the  hearth,  and  tlie  inner 
iM"irt，  5 1 0.  51t>.  Five  Sacrifices  of 
the  Princes,  >*>19. 

Five  State  Rohes  五 服, worn 
under  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Yu9 

Five  Time  K  ecpe;  rs  of  tlie 

Shukinff  ： ― the    yenr*    month,  day. 

stars,  an<l  Hat«\s  of  calendar,  Ab^L 
Five  \*irtues  see  Five  Qunliiiesv  105. 

194.  114. 
Flatulence,  its  causes, 
Fluid  see  Vital   l'luid  and  Primo- 

genial  Fluid. 
Fluid- caters    食 氣 者 ， Taoisls 

living  on  air  to  obtain  immorUility, 

Flying  fish, 

Fortune-tf^Ilers  相工  and  tlieir 

methods,  Chap.  XXIV. 
1' mm  (let's  melting  metal,  '294. 
Four  classes  of  the  disciples  of 

Om/uriux 四 料， H7H. 

F (、 u  r  G  re y  Ben  rds  四 維 ， re- 
cluses at  the  beginning  of  the  Han 
epoch,  437. 

Y  our    Quadrants  (Constellations) 

四 星： 一 Bine  Dragon,White Tiger, 
Scarlet  Bird,  and  Black  Tortoise, 

Four  S<，as  and  Four  Mountains 四 

海 ， 四 山 fon""ig  the  limits  of 
ancient  China,  2ibL 

Y  r  ogs  become  quails,  32(k  336,  368. 


xl  by  Google 


―  _  一  _  -^7-»  -. 


Index  of  Subjeotfl. 


541 


(； 


G. 

ems  and  pearls,  made  artificially 
by  the  Tnoists,  liliL 
eui  i  f 山 represented  with  feath- 
ers and  wings,  293.  330,  so  light  that 
they  can  tly  like  wild  geese, 
e  ('  m  a  n  c  e  r  s  占 ^J"      5^ ,  53 1 . 
hosts  diffuse   "iuI  invisil)l'，, 

191.  the  dead  do  not  become  j^husls 
and  have  no  consriuiism'ss,  eod. ； 
a  name  of  the  passive  principle, 
etxl.  ；  ghosts  are  not  the  essence  of 
the  dea<K  IMsetj.;  rhap.  XVIII, 
ghosts  are  visions  of  sick  peopl«'» 

24<>,  apparitions  of  the  lluid 
of  sickness,  240.  s<*t:n  hy  madmen, 

made  of  the  stary  lluid,  24  L 
ghosts  the  essence  of  old  creatures, 
iM  1  ?  ghosts  living  in  men,  md.,  tlie  ！ 
'spirits  of  cyclical  signs,  "242.  crea- 
tures like  men: ― living  rorpses  ^* 

尸, rmwling  driiions  凶， gob- 
lins devils  %  243,  kingdom 
of  the  Ghosts 鬼國， \v  irked 
ghosts  萬 rrwi.,  ghosts  appari- 
tions in  humnn  shnpe,  244.  are  the 
Yang  Uuid,  Ui  ere  fore  red,  bitrnin*; 
and  able  to  nt)scond,  24tJ,  know 
what  is  secret,  291.  devils  are  super- 
natural apparitions  produced  by 
the  sun,  299.  ghosts  an;  burning 
poison  and  have  a  red  colour,  ti!^9, 
ghosts  and  spirits  more  ethereal 
than  immortals,  524f  insensible  of 
joy  and  anger,  eod"  expulsion  of 
Rhosts,  W 丄 sick  people  see  ghosts, 

host   of  F  r  ve  r        J^,    son  of 

Chuan  Jhu,  ^42,  hM. 

ud 上帝      Sh"，"j  TV,  134. 

•203  ；  n  pulilic  spirit,  、vlm  does  not 


troithlt*  abdiit  private  grievances,  ！ 
204:  223.  227.  iiL  ； m  iliiL 


Golden  Age,  its  praise  unfounded, 
471  seq. 

Government,   must  be  based  on 

virtue,  not  on  criminnl  law,  441.  hy 

not  governing,  2ll 
(j  r a n d  Annalist        史 ^  =  Ss^ 

Ma  CKien、  the  author  of  the  Ski-chi\ 
^  LLL  Ulii  14S,  153,  UiL 

"； 8.  2:>4,  332,  34：).  4«>2.  463.  iM- 
(i  re  at  Divine  r  "f 《 ，K  i  ^^^fj^ 卜 

二  Yen  Tsr,  ILL 
Great  Wa  1 1 ,   ronstructeil  by  Meny 

Tien,  UiZ. 
Green  Dragon  see  Blue  I)i*agon,  'AO  1  - 

IL 

Halo  (aureole)   )\  ;《, 17:;，  Hfi 

II  h[)]mu  (！, ss  and  fortune  nut 
connected  witli  wisdom  and  intelli- 
gence, 1 4>K  Chn\u  XI  nnd  XII,  not 
given  by  Heaven  as  a  reward,  1  ">t>. 

Hare  兔, in  the  mm""  con- 
ceives by  licking  the  pubescenct*  of 
plants,  ami  the  leveret  issues  from 
its  mouth,  ^19. 

Heart  《、 , governs  the  inembeiN 
and  the  senses  and  is  not  governed 
by  them  HLc<mstel)atiunt  11^  127, 

Hearth  ^？,  sacrifice  to%  343,  <">d 
of  the  Hearth,  illL 

Heat  nnd  cold  ^温， （  Imp.  XXI, 
not  inlluenced  hy  the  sovereign,  278t 
coinciding  with  joy  and  anger, 

Heaven  ^^，  emits  its  lluid  every- 
where, but  acts  spontaneoiksly,  ii^j 
has  neiilu*r  UKuith  nor  eyes,  eod"  its 
tluid  is: ― jilarid,  lran(|uil，  drsireless, 
inactive,  and  unlxisied  *| 舌;/ ： ？翻: 

無爲 無事， 巡 its  山， 
spontatteity,  95^  «md  inactive, 

dues  n<»t  speak  nor  act,  101>  re- 
primands contrary  to  its  nature,  102> 
affects  things,  hut  is  not  afTected  l»y 


oogle 


Index  of  Subjects. 


them,  101),  is  the  maMer  (if  mau  and 
things,  eod'  and  1 1 1,  its  lluid  forms 
tlie  shapeless  einjiyrean,  113.  not 
moved  by  the  sighs  of  ten  thousand 
people,  eod.f  does  not  reprimand  a 
sovereign,  nor  kill  malefactors, 
Heaven's  spontaaeity  and  inaction 
preclude  wisdom  and  sensalioos, 
127,  Heaven  does  not  speak,  1 2，S，  the 
、v"rds  of  the  wise  are  the  words 
of  Heaven,  eod.%  anthropttmorphisins 
of  the  Shiking  and  the  Shuking,  erxi. ； 
the  heart  of  Heaven  in  tlie  bosom 
"f  ihe  Sages,  129,  Heaven's  decree, 
130，  132,  408,  Heaven  is  spontane- 
ous, 133，  human  qualities  ascribed 
to  it,  134，  wealth  and  honour  come 
from  Heaven,  LitistM 卜, 404.  its  body, 
183,  Heaven  does  not  speak  imr 
hear,  its  nature  is  non-intci'ference, 
ls4;  227,  Heaven's  ways  difficult 
to  understand,  242;  Chap.  XIX，  the 
pure  elements  formed  heaven,  the 
impure  ones  earth*  2.V2,  heaven  is 
not  air,  hut  has  a  l"uly，  2">7,  its 
distance  from  earth,  eod.%  its  circiun-  1 
ference  ^H.r>  degrees,  not  raised  ！ 
in  suminer,  nnv  depressed  in  winter, 
2W，  not  high  in  the  south,  nor  low 
in  the  north,  eod.,  not  shaped  like 
a  reclining  umbrella,  261,  looks  like 
a  bowl  turned  upside  down,  eod" ' 
is  as  level  as  earth,  heaven 
makes  a  circumvolution  of  IltiS  de- 
grees 二  730,000  Li  every  day,  2Wu 
heaven's  movement  the  spontaneous 
emission  of  fluid,  its  distance 

from  earth  upwards  o(  60,000  Li, 1 
275,  its  principle  spontaneity,  283, 
Heaven's  anger*  28t>,  the  dark  blue  , 
sky,  tod"  Heaven  humanised,  eod.; 
all  beings  to  Heaven  like  children, ； 
289,  Heaven  does  not  write,  295, 
emits  its  iluid  into  Earth,  322，  min- ; 
ister  of  Heaven,  42】,  Mencius  on 
Heaven,  42'2,  the  Heaven  of  anti- , 


quity  is  the  lleawn  of  tu-day,  4 丁  ] ， 
Heaven  is  a  body  like  the  Earth, 
:,0D,  Heaven  the  master  of  the 
hundred  spirits,  5"2(),  virtues  are  its 
principles  eod. 

H(k;i ven  and  Earth 天^^,  by  the 
fusion  of  their  fluids  all  things  are 
produced,  9^  are  like  husband  and 
wife,  93^  99,  287,  32^  are  inactive, 
cannot  act,  are  devoid  of  know- 
ledge, 101,  do  not  create  man  on 
purpose,  103,  their  iluids  mixing, 
things  grow  naturally  and  spontane- 
ously, 104.  the  great  man  equals 
them  in  virtm',  129,  believed  to 
punisli  tlie  wicked,  164,  cannot  be 
interrogated  by  diviners,  182,  do 
not  respond^  184;  have  a  body,  eorL; 
set  in  order,  193，  conLiin  air,  ^">'J, 
act  in  spontaneous  liarmony,  277, 
their  nature  is  spontnneity,  280, 
father  and  muther  of  mankind, 
iJ^7,  like  a  great  furnace  filled 
with  Yang  (fire)  and  Yin  (water), 
294, 誕 330,  are  both  bodies, 
337，  were  not  born  and  do  not 
die,  349,  ennjoiutly  produce  all 
things,  471,  their  size  many  ten 
thousand  Li,  510，  the  emperor 
treats  Heaven  like  his  father  and 
Karth  like  his  mother,  517,  in  man 
the  mind  of  Heaven  and  Earth 
reach   their   highest  development. 

Heaven  ly  fluid 天氣， HO,  IM, 

H e a v c d  1  y    officials         官, tlie 

stars,  138!  '121. 
Hill   sacrifice  F 谷 ng-shan, 

Homeopathetic  treatment 

^  i 台 cold  cured  by  cold,  and 
fever  by  fire,  299. 
liouk  Star 钩星 = Mercury,  12L 
Hot  Water  Abyss  see  T'any-ku. 


Index  of  SubjocU. 


H  ouse  jjj  ,  constellation,  112, 
118.  121. 

II  u  ma ii  Km  perors^^  ， mythical 
rulers  of  remotest  antiquity,  193, 

252. 

L 

Ignorance,    blissful    of  primitive 

times,  100- 
Im mortality,  drug  of 仙藥， 

aimed  nt  by  Taoists,  33fit 
Inaction 無 

Incidents  偶, defiuition,  143. 
Intoxication ,  the  virtuous  believed 
m»t  to  become  intoxicated,  AKL 

K. 

Killing  animals  see  animals. 

L. 

Land  division  in  Wi?i',  3K2. 

Language,  different  in  ancient  and 
modern  times  and  in  different  parts 
of  the  empire,  12^ 

Life  /^T  ；  t\w  TaoisLs  endeavour  U> 
prolong  life  by  quietism  and  dis- 
passionateness, 34(^  its  proper  length 
a  hundred  years,  314>  4iL  Lon^; 
life,  the  shortest  Ifl  years,  medium 
8Q  years,  longest  iiQ  years, 

Life  and  d  eat  It 夕 de[»cnd  on 
Destiny,  Liliseq. 

Litrrati 儒， 250,  252,  25L  265, 
304,  332.  m  434,  44L  473, 皿 

Lunn       ,  bird  inferior  to  the  plujt*nix. 

Luck  jj^，  definition,  141- 

Lumbago  (sciatica)  or  said 
to  be  caused  by  devils  llogging  the 
patient,  299，  cured  with  honey  and 
cinnabar,  eod. 

M. 

Madness  ^J^^，  a  disturhnnce  of 
the  vital  force,  240*  of  nature  ^80. 


Magpies        }Jj^，  know  the  future, 

Man,  born  from  Heaven  and  Karth 
nnd  endowed  witli  the  heavenly 
lluid,  why  active,  eod.  ；  his  in- 
significance, wlien  compared  with 
lleaveu  and  Kartli,  109,  filled  with 
the  heavenly  fluid,  111,  a  tiny  crea- 
ture, 1 12,  imbibing  the  heavenly 
lluid  man  is  born,  138,  man  &  pigmy, 
183，  before  his  birth  and  after  death 
man  is  part  of  the  primogenial  tluid, 
1 94,  he  is  born  and  kept  alive  by 
the  Yin  and  the  Yang^  249,  a  crea- 
ture like  others,  289,  the  noblest  of 
the  productions  of  Heaven  and 
KHVt\u  320,  3^2,  like  lice,  .^22,  is 
born  by  propagation,  eod"  never 
metamorpliosed,  327.  not  different 
from  other  creatures,  33:,,  first 
nmoni;  naked  creatures,  353,  5*」S， 
endowed  with  a  spontaneous  mind 
and  a  uniform  disposition,  386,  aver- 
age people  and  people  above  and 
helow  the  average,  38<;，  391,  endow- 
ed with  the  nature  <>f  Heaven  and 
Karth,  390，  with  the  Five  Qualities, 
ewL、  the  most  intelligent  of  the  ten 
thousand  creatures,  52S. 

Marriage,  agr  of,  47*> 

Matrinrcliatc,  473. 

Mechanisms: ― a  llyin (；  kite,  a  wood- 
en carriage;  and  •  liorses,  made  by 
W  Tse  and  Lu  Pan,  499. 

Medicine,  liquid  and  pills,  282，  min- 
eral drugs  藥 石， 丄 V2. 

Meteors 觅*,  230,  271,  2Ilsei|., 

Miracles 怪， 244i  (，―  XXVI. 

Moon  月， moves  L3  degrees  ― 
26.000  Li  every  day,  266,  a  liare 
and  u  toad  in  thf*  moon,  268,  the 
tnoon  is  water,  eod. 

Music,  its  power  on  animals,  371^ 
its  magical  force,  222- 


：)44 


Index  of  Subjects. 


N, 

Naked  People  § 榘圃. 407. 
Nature  '|^,  iiiittiral  roncoinitant 

^^，  adverse  ^J，  140，  inunaii  natiur 
n fleeted  hy  its  environnicnt,  375.  hy 
instniction,  3S'2.  dilTerent  vieUs  on 
original  nature,  Chn p.  XXXII. 
Natural  feel i n^s  and  n.itiirul  dis- 
position H| 生， thr  basis  of  liuiunn 
activity,  384,  said  to  r*>rres[><nu]  to 
the  Yin  and  tlio  Yang%  :《'V'- 
N  i  n  v  Conti  ihmi  ts 九州， iiaiL 
N  i  n e  Ilea  v  v  v\s 九核， m 
N  iiic  Pro vin c^s  (('iiruits) -二 

riiina,  25^  mL 
N  i  n v  H illations       j^fe,  ascendants 

mid  descendants,  tt)2. 
N  I  n  v  Streams 九 川， k2i\  I . 

(Is 九贿， of  tl"，  (htm 
ilyiuisty,  disappeared,   *J1H,  auspi- 
cious, 50."),  thrir  history* 
N i  it  c   W i  I  d   T ri  lies    uf  the  Kast 

九^，  i 

N o tes,  musical,  1*21. 

N'i  xious  influences  jji ,  Cliap.  XIJII. 

N  ii  r  si  ii     of  cliildrtMi,  ill  1. 

o. 

Odes  of  tlie  Shikimj 詩， 1»L 

( ) in e n s  (Pui'tents) '驗, （liap,  XIII, 
diffrrent  kinds.  173,  1H:{,  the  lucky 
meet  with  lucky  omens  l>v  chance, 
18<>P  omens  and  signs  are  always 
true,  1 90,  sli;ipf(l  like  mni，， 
indicato  future  happii"'ss  or  mis- 
fortune* m,  correspond  to  soine- 
thing  good,  36H<  liappen  Mpontane- 
onslv,  forf..  (hiring  the  Han  ejxich, 
40<>,  under  Mbnj  7V,  under 
Kuany  Wu  77，  iM. 

0  m  i  n  o  u  s  c  r v n  t  tirv  s  J^q  /j^J,  h;ive 
no  specie-s,  an'  born  l>y  accident, 
lVoin  a  jnopitious  tluiil, ： 化'； - 


Originnl  fluid,  see  Priinogenial 
lluid. 

Orphan  of  Chan 趙孤， 
P. 

I'a  ri  ots        鴻， can  talk, 

P o  a  r  1  s ,  genuine  ones  in  fishes,  27^, 

niul  shells,  378. 
Pe.irl-troe  in   the  fart  I  tost  south- 

、"'st 珠榭， ^ 

l*er feet  tnnn, ，：" 

IMianttniis  consist  of  the  solar 

lluid,  245,  vm\\  poison,  247. 

V\ur  nix 魁凰， Chap.  XXX,  a  holy 
ItirtU  huge  with  a  vnriegated  ptuin* 
ant»,  H  arcotupanied  by  UuMisands 
of  1/mls,  'My\\m  jihcenix  and  unicorn 
signs  ui  universal  peace,  3,;4,  as 
hig  ns  a  horse;  h.  feet  higli,  36奢；* 
did  not  come  at  Confucius,  time,  4<>r>. 

Phenoitirnalists  智： f 复 之 , 
scliolars  who  explained  calamities 
and  oilier  nnliiral  phenomena  hy 
mural  causes,  127,  128,  ！ >8：^. 

Physiognomy   see  Antliri»|)"scop_v. 

V\\  y  si  o  ;x  n  o  mists ，  have  divided 
liuinan  features  into  more  than 
st*viM»ty  classes,  22- 

Pillar  of  Heaven 天柱 = JT  tt/t- 
tnn.  89i  2ML 

Plan  of  the  Yellow  River 河圖， 
9i  2Mi  294,  405, 

IMum,  may  grow  on  a  cherry-tree, 

Poison  毒， Chap.  XXIII,  the  hot 
air  of  the  sunt  298,  bad  mm  filled 
with  a  poisonous  lluid,  300,  poLsou 
of  glih-ton^ned  people,  303. 

Po  le  of  heaven  255. 

Polar  star 姊展， 気 、屮 條， 2li3. 
Pol  v  irainy  i  its  draw  hacks,  141 . 
I*  o  r  te  ii  t  s  see  i  )iik*iis. 
Posllniuious  titles,   Ui^  208.  m 
l)r"   n a  n  t  women,   what   they  are 
to  avoid,  while  with  child,  141. 


Index  of  Subjects. 


545 


Primitive  life,  17  K 


virtue  and  knowledge,  100. 
I'  r i  m o  g  e  ri  i  a  1  lluid  vague, 
<lifl'use,  and  uncotisciiHis,  the  human 
fluid  a  part  of  itt  194,  genuine  and 
liannonious  ；  all  people  611ed  with 

it,  in. 

V  r  i  in  o  rd  i  a  I  t^eueration  of  Hsli  and 
grass, 

I*r  o  \)V  i  e  t  v   and    ri^liteoiisnoiis  ii|>- 

helil  against  //aw  Fei  Tse，  4：14  se' 卜 
Public  instruct"")  and  criminal  law 

what  f"r，  'ML 
Punishinetits  tm"'d  nut  in  autiiitin 

and  winter,  14H,  2H0f  291. 
Purple  tmh'tiis  2^  ^ ^  a  lV'liritoii.s 

plai"，  LLL  eaten  l)v  Taoists,  A'.W. 


Q. 


R. 


H  a  i  n  |^  ，  |"»rt«'ii(l'ul  by  iii-s'n't，、、  l>y 
the  ex[»ansion  of  chords,  ； ind  h\ 
chronic  diseases,  109,  its  origin,  277, 
becomes  dew  and  frost,  etptL  \  :i  lluid 
emitted  I iy  heaven,  2W，  the  Rain 

H  a  t  ^^病 *  a  skin-discasc  cured  hv 

eating  n  cat,  1  r>S. 
R  ； i  V  e  n  為， three-legged,  can-  i 

not  live  in  the  siiu, 
Uvd  Emperor  ^帝， 178,  2:". 

Khinopithecus  j 生 ^ 生, knows  the 
past,  35H. 

s.  I 

祭祁， <  hap.  XL!  ami 
XL1I,  presented  to  Heaven  nnd 
Karth,  McuinUiins  and  Rivet-s.  the 
Spirits  of  tlu*  Land  and  Grain,  5 1 0, 
to  thr  Five  "t'nii  aiu!  the 
anC(*stors,  :)1<;,  to  Shatigti^  to  the  Six 
Superior  Powers,  the  imperiaU 
suluirhan,  patriarcliaU  and  ancrstral 


.sacrifices,  t'xl.,  sacrifices  to  the 
Seasons,  to  Heat  mid  (、old,  the  Sim, 
tl)e  Moon,  the  Stars,  tlie  Four  Car- 
dinal Points,  to  Water  nnd  Drought, 
■")  1 7，  to  Kartli,  at  the  meals,  523,  to 
tlit*  Five  Kuijiei  ors  and  Three 
Rulers.  (o  Mountains,  Gates, 

and  Doors,  W;，  of  an  o\,  514,  of 
wood,  a  cadf,  a  sheep,  se«j., 
millet.  rice-cnket  and  soup  oflered 
to  Kartli,  510,  tlie  meaning  of  sacri- 
fices, r">9,  ">35,  motives  of  sacri- 
fices:― gratitude  and  ancestor  wor- 
ship, ；' )17，  they  are  not  enjoyed  by 
gliosLs  or  spirits,  hut  merely  sym- 
bolical, ")22,  of  no  avail*  :一>： 口. 

Sa^es,  on<lued  with  tin*  liannonioiis 
lluid,  3H>,  not  inihuet)  willi  a  special 
fluid,  322.  credited  wi 山 the  gift  of 
pn>|)litfcyt  3.">3.  prtKluced  hy  Heaven 
even  ••、< >"  years,  i'"- 

S a ^ <»  birds  and  aniuials,  3 了  1 . 

Scarlet  B i  r<l  烏， the  soiitluM^n 
quadrant  of  solar  mansions,  10 奢;. 

S c h o  u  1  s 库 |^、  tounded  fr"m  oldon 
times,  4^4.  * 

Scroll  ,,f  the  Lo  j^  、tj,  ^  23^ 
294.  4aa. 

Sec rrta  ry  falcon         |>nisonciiisf  30 1  • 

Sensations*  how  causetl  hy  the 
mental 

Seven  Sacrifices  ,  performed 

by  the  Kmperor, 
Seven  ty  odd  disciples  of  Crmfucius 
七+ 子， all  snges,  151,  16K  375, 
392,  390. 

Sickness  not  a  punishment  *>f 
Heaven,  1  19. 

Six  ('lassies  the  Five  Clas- 

sics and  the  Classic  of  Music,  128. 

Six  Depa rtmrnts  of  lJtrratuiv 

1*1^.  under  the  Han  dynasty  ： ― clas- 
sics, six  arU,  philosophy,  |x>etr\\  mili- 
tary science,  and  iHvination,  H3,  47。. 


； vh; 


Index  of  Subjects. 


Six  D  uniesl  ic  A  n i in u  1  s  ， 
the  horse,  the  ox,  the  goat,  the 
pig,  the  dog.  ami  the  fowl,  】9:1 

S i x  Honoured  ones  ^JiL 

Six  Institutions  of  the  Chou  dyn- 
asty ,  adniinistnitiouf  in- 
struction, rites,  police,  jurisdiction, 
public  welfare,  daiL 

Six  Passions  '| 宵 ： ― cheerful- 
ness, aiii^er,  grief,  joy,  love,  and 
hatred,  1 10- 

Six  States  國 ： ― Ym9  ( ，kao，  Han, 
Wei,  (JlCi、  and  CKuf  leagued  against 
CKb"  278,  305,  • 

Sixty-  To  u  r  I)i  a  grains  ^^十叫 
*|、,  composed  h\  Wen  Wan;/,  K7, 

Solstices  ^  in  .summer  and  winter, 

Sophists 辯 +  ,  poison  tlowing  from 
their  mouths,  ^0^- 

S  orcerers  ,  filled  with  tho  Yantj 
iluid,  2A^  298,  live  in  the  South, 
247,  can  predict  fate，  eo<L 

Soul  ^|^，  the  souls  of  tlie  dead  are 
dissolved  atul  cannot  hear  any  more, 
207;  animal  .soul 魄 ixnd  mind  i^, 
2<)9,  tlie  soul  二  vital  lluid,  228, 
roaming  about  during  a  di'eam,  erxL 

Southern  Circuit  ^  =  Tung- 
chun  in  Hupet\  298. 

Sparrows  turn  into  clams,  326, 

Speech  and  fire  have  the  same  es- 
sence, 300. 

•Spirits  ^^厅 believed  to  punisli 
the  guiily,  164t  difTuse  nnd  shape- 

lcss 恍 、無 形，, 神 sl"< 

a  name  of  the  active  principle,  191， 
j[|[Jl  ^(  the  spiritual  lluid  forms  man  ' 
and  at  death  reverts  to  its  original 
state,  192;  spirits  are  unconscious, 
197.  spirits  Heaven's  angels,  291, ； 
diffuse  and  incorporeal,  292,  3。' 丄 | 


:'3,;，  can  soar,  eod  、  what  is  vague 
and  iitKsubstautial  has  the  nature  of 
a  spirit,  353,  it  seems  as  if  the 
spiriLs  helped  tlie  happy  and  caused 
the  inisfnrtune  of  tlie  miserable,  144， 
clothes,  3-G  inches  long,  oflered 
to  spirits.  ,')1「). 
Spirit  bird 神雀， 息 

•Spirit  of  VI :i rth  W 审， propitiated 
cifter  the  building  of  a  house,  「H 

Spirit  of  Heaven  ^^)帅， repri- 
manding a  sovereign,  1 19,  imper- 
sonated by  a  man,  232,  angry,  287, 
like  a  king  in  liis  residence,  2WK 
352,  ch«'inging  his  mind,  408. 


Spirit  of  Rain  師. 

Spirit  of  Sickness   ^£^^，  531 

Spirit  of  the  Wind  H 白, 222, 
Spiritism  by  means  of  mediums  in 

•Spontaneity  自 ，  (，hap,  UK 
nuians  absence  of  purpose.  2iiiL 

Spontaneous   fluid    氣 自 
101,  UiL 

Spontaneous  harmony  o(  heaven 

nnd  earth,  when  it  rains,  277. 
Spook 妖， Chap.  XVII. 

Spring  nnd  Autumn  >j^^(，  、、'ork 
of  Confucius,  41L  447,  451, 

Spri  uj;  and  Autumn  period,  722  to 
ifill  b,c,，  lj^i  210,  269,  21L  274^ 
：化 2,  363，  iiL 

iS  ta  rs  ,  their  eflluence 氣  gives 
wealth  and  honour,  138,  produces 
and  develops  things  on  earth,  21 1 , 
stars  are  not  round,  271.  their  size 
a  liundred  Li，  275,  are  nttached  to 
heaven,  511. 

Struggle  for  existence,  10-^  secj. 

Style,  111  et  sc《i. 

Sun 曰， ten  suns  in  Yao's  time,  89> 
•271，  the  sun  came  back,  89j  reverted 
to  the  meridian,  etnL,  and  I 】6,  en- 
circled by  a  white  halo,  when  Ching 


Index  of  Subjects. 


547 


K'o  stabbed  Skih  Huang  7Y，  1  lh, 
solur  tluid  =  heavenlv  lluid,  2-1  \K 
motion  of  the  sun  nnd  the  moon, 
250,  Chap.  XX,  the  sun  takes  lii 
(liflerent  courses  during  a  year,  not 
^  260,  its  different  sue  in  the 
morning  and  at  noon,  263,  sun 
and  moon  like'  ants  crawling  on 
a  mill-stone  are  carried  along  l»y 
heaven  from  east  to  west,  2Gt>, 
the  sun  moves  1  degree  =  2.000  Li 
every  day,  eod"  is  fire,  267，  a  three- 
legged  raven  in  the  sun,  2HH,  sun 
and  moon  nut  round,  27K  the  sun 
is  fire,  357- 

Suu-st ro  "火 流所 jjj|J ,  the rflVct 
of  poisonous  air,  299.  lliKL 

Swearing  \>y  Heaven,  403  se<j. 

S  w  it  e  t  dow  |^^^,  a  lucky  union, 
produced  by  the  hanuonious  fluid, 
366. 

Swords,  their  manufacture,  377t  fa- 
iih»us  swords,  f>0.S-f)<>4. 

T. 

Tail 尾， constellation,  11 H. 
Tao  道 , the  fundamental  principle 
of  Taoism,  14^  328^  33^  ^Mi  iliL 
T  a  i)  i  s  m ,  1Q"2. 

Taoists,  argue  on  spontaneilv,  92^ 
97.  made  an  artificial  apparition 
of  Lady  Wang,  eod*、  possess  real 
virtue  e.  inaction  and  quietism, 
100,  said  to  have  become  genii, 
328.  exhibiting  tricks  at  the  court 
of  Huai  Nan  Tse9  335,  drinking  the 
elixir  of  life  and  eating  purple 
boletus,  339,  cannot  be  drowned 
nor  burned,  34^i  (Mmp.  XXVIU, 
living  on  air  and  regulating  their 
breath  to  become  immortal,  318. 
take  medicines  witha  view  to  pro- 
long life,  341),  make  artificial  gems, 
378,  studying  the  art  of  immortality, 
52^ 


T  e  in  p     t ,   ex  pression  of  Heaven's 

anger,  285,  3iL 
Thirty- five  kingdoms    ^£  -|-' 玉 * 

[p^],  beyond  the  sea,  where  pluni- 
i^erous  nnd  feathered  tribes  live-, 

254, '篮 
Three  Dynasties  ^£ >^  ： ― Hsia, 

r,«,  and  Chou,  214,Tl9,  322.  464, 
their  different  systems  of  gov  era - 
ment»  475. 
Three  hundred   scaly  Animals 
三 百 輸^ I，  of  which  the  dragon 

the  6rst，  3^3* 

Tliree  hundred  and  sixty  naked 
animals 三百六 +  U 蟲， 
mnong  which  man  ranks  first,  Ii2iL 

Tliree  Mountains  disappeared  dur- 
ing tlie  CtC in  epoch,  276,  aQ!L 

Three  Offerings  二  jfi|3  >  made  to 
the  Genii  of  Spring,  Autumn,  and 
Winter,  rilS. 

Three  Rulers  see  Five  Emperors 
and  Three  Rulers. 

Three  Sacrifices  二  jj^,  of  the 
high  dignitaries,  519. 

Th under  雷， Chap.  XXII,  not 
Heaven's  angry  voice,  28").  not  caus- 
ed by  Heaven's  fetching  a  dragon, 
285,  representetl  by  d  rums  or  as  the 
44  Thunderer  '•，  292,  the  exploding 
solar  lluid,294,  fire,  eod,  ；  why  thunder 
must  be  fire,  295,  the  thunder  and 
the  dragon  attract  one  another, 
thunder  how  caused,  357. 

Th  under  goblet  雷辦， of  the 
Hsia  dynasty,  293.  5 Oft. 

T  li  u  n  d  e  r  e  r  雷必， the  God  of 
Thunder,  an  athlete  with  drums 
and  a  hammer,  292,  511,  521. 

Tiger  1^,  ]u>\v]itig  attracts  the  wind, 
279,  3f><). 

Time  {|^,  propitious  or  unpropitious, 
1  \h%  14(),  definition,  171.  determines 
liajipy  and  unhappy  events,  021, 

36* 


54S 


Index  of  Subjects. 


Time   periods    簡氣， 21  solar 

periods,   into    which   the  year  is 

divided,  281. 
Toad  始 H  cannot  live  in  the 

moon,  '2<>H. 
Tortoise  神^^ ,  spiritual, 
Trance  (Faint) 珍， 19^  liitL 
T  r  i  b  u  t  e   of  Yii   禹 j*^' ,  Yii-kumj, 

cluipter  of  tiie  Shukiny,  2 二 3,  271 

Twelve  Holy  Men  Twelve  Sages 
十二 聖， ,W4,  32^  3：)1>. 

Twelve  horn r y  characters  and 
their  corresponding  aninuils  -J- 

M 之禽， "瓜 

Twelve  Spirits  of  the  Cardinal 
！)' "nts 十二 神， 534. 

Twenty-eight  constellations  (so- 
lnr  lnansion.s)  "f-  J\  the 
re^stinpf-placcfi  of  sun  and  moon,  257. 

T  w "  S a c  r i  l'i  ces  ,必， to  the 
Spirit  of  Fire  and  the  Lonl  of  the 
•Soil,  .j18:  Two  Sacrifices  of  ordin- 
ary scholars,  M". 

u. 

Unconsciousness  uf  the  dead,  194. 

Unicorii 麟麟^ ：  Kilin,  266,  like 
a  deer  with  one  horn,  a  holy  animal, 
359,  a  white  unicorn  with  five  feet, 
370,  like  a  deer  with  two  horns, 
etxL、  resembling  a  stag,  eocL,  wild 
animal  with  joined  horns,  37  K 

V.  I 

Vermilion  grass 乐草， an  auspi- 
cious plant,  132, 

Visions  of  ghosts,  caused  by  pain 
and  fear.  23!K 

Vital  fluid 氣， 賴氣 m '氣力 
the  length  of  life  depends  upon  it, 
138.  man  lives  by  the  vital  tlnid 
residing  in  the  arteries,  191,  it  (ills 


the  body  as  millet  ami  rice  a  bag, 
and  disperses  at  death.  1 92  ；  hlond 
the  vital  force  of  tlie  living,  193  ； 
its  seat  in  the  blood,  194,  1 9>r>  ；  vital 
energy  maintained  by  eating  and 
drinking.  198;  vital  force  witljin  the 
body  and  outside  the  body,  198; 
thi'oiigli  death  tt"，  lluid  is  lost,  and 
the  vital  spirit  来!! 神  dissolved, 
nller  death  it  is  a  formless  Iluid9 
eod，;  the  vital  spirit  of  all  creatures  is 
extinguished  by  death,  it  evaporates 
and  disappears,  201,  causes  thought 
nnd  sensations,  239,  it  gives  know- 
ledge and  speech,  249,  copious  or 
scarce,  determines  the  length  of  life, 
313，  321)t  received  by  men  at  their 
birth,  forms  the  constitution,  :C， 
vanishes  at  death,  330,  is  drawn 
from  food,  :U8,  the  vital  force  con- 
centrated forms  the  human  being. 

Vital  force  =  Vita)  Auid. 

w. 

Water  Spirit  聰麵， son  of  Chuan 

Hsu,  242,  iM- 
We  i  rd  sayings  of  childivn  童 言蓉. 

232, '厶 37,  due  to  the  inlluence  of 

Mars,  246. 
White  Emperor 白帝， 2^L 

White  Tiger 白 jj^,  western  <juad- 
rant  of  solnr  mansions,  10H,  534. 

Will-o'-the -、、  isp  the  blood 

of  the  slain,  193. 

W  i  u  d  ^]^,  lorescen  by  insects,  109, 

its  intluence  on  robben?  and  thieves, 
and  on  the  market  prices,  1 10; 
winds  on  New  Year's  Day  portend 
the  new  year.  111,  lucky  wind, 
181,  the  God  of  Wind 風 j 白， ML 

Wine-sp ring  泉， an  auspicious 
portent,  3<it>. 


Index  of  Subjects' 


549 


Wizards  and  [jriests  havt' 

no  power,  h^L 
World,  lying  in  the  South-east  of  the 

universe,  255,  2fiS* 

Y. 

Yang  Haid  (jkrinoiplr)  comes  forth 
spontaneously,  99  ；  1 10;  governs  Iif<% 
111;  the  hot  ilitids,  eod.y  is  broiling 
hot,  22()  ；  becomes  the  mincK  209,  is 
fire  and  as  such  hot  and  red,  24(5, 
boys  and  sorcerers  imbued  with  it, 
eod.\  it  predominntes  at  the  time  of  a 

the  vital  spirit,  249,  sliines  like  the 
sun,  prevails  in  srnnmer  and  is  scnrce 
in  winter,  248t  is  warm  and  genial, 
、」？■*，  is  brightness  and  warmth,  2S4, 
an  immense  fire,  294,  ornaments 
originate  from  tlu»  Yang、  302 • 
Yin 陰 fluid  (principle),  9^  110; 
governs  death.  1 11，  the  cold  tluids 
rod,  rushing  against  the  hot  Yang 


lluid,  22G，  |>re(ioiiunaU*s  timing  nn 
eclipse  of  the  sun,  246,  it  produces 
the  hones  and  ilesti*  249,  is  (lark, 
ahuutids  in  winter,  and  falls  short 
in  stiumicr,  258,  corresponds  to  the 
North,  259,  is  cold  imirder,  271),  is 
rain  and  cold,  284，  clouds  and  rain 
are  Yin,  2ILL 
Yin  ； md  Yany 陰陽， i"  hannuny, 
98%  U)X  12(>;  Fmand  Fany  crystallise 
ntul  produce  manY  wlio  by  death  is 
again  dissolved  into  these  lluids. 
196;  can  injure  the  good,  242.  cause 
the  length  and  the  shortness  of  tl"， 
days,  2")8,  283.  Yin  and  Yang  coming 
into  friction  produce  thunder  and 
lightning,  21)4,  MH^  Yin  nnd 

Yang  were  not  boiTi  nnd  do  not  dw9 
I)  1"，  their  lluids  the  lluids  uf  Heaven 
and  Earthy  368;  Yin  and  Yang  and 
good  and  evil,  388,  disorganised, 
when  propriety  and  righteousness 
are  neglected,  134.  in  harmony, 
when  the  government  is  good, 


oogle 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


INDEX  OF  PHOFEK  NAMES. 


A. 

Ai 哀， duke  of  Ut,  74^  4(V) 
Ai 哀， duke  of  Wei,  12fL 
A  t  Ti  J^^         H(，"  emperor, 
Analects  =  Lun-yit,  the 

Utterances  of  C<mfucius,  184, 
288.  295.  393,  414,  4(;7，  409,  「義 
520;  their  origin  and  original  si/.i\ 

A  ng  X|J，  prince  "f  、VV/，  treaclu'roiis- 
ly  killed  by  Wet  Yany,  11L 

An  nam  日 |^，  the  South  of  tlir 
Sun,  %ir>H. 

A  n  namese         tnahout,  IPS,  513. 

Aquila  ^-^t  ―  Hrrdsiuaii,  a  con- 
stellation reached  by  the  sun  in 
winter,  2aiL 


B. 


Baktria        g，  2iLL 


子， a  Mohist  of  tlio 


c. 

Chai  a  slave-girl  of  <7o>«.  Vis- 

count of  Chaoy  .'^07. 
(, fi'ai  region  in  Shantung  IRQ. 

f 1  h  a  n  -  s  h  n  book  of  prophc- 

cies,  319,  Aaii 
C  hVn  Tse 
Han  time, 
f1  h  a  n  g  ypjf ,  river  in  llonon^  3 & 2. 

ang-an  -^r  capital  uiuhu'  i\\c 

Han,  mL 

Chang  Ch'ien  a  faniuiis 

traveller,  2.ri4. 

r"i、g  rhunK  8 hih    gg 仲師, 

a  ginnt,  473. 


Chang  Liang  艮， partisan  of 
Han  Kan  Tsu,  9^  178^  212,  235. 
:{'27,  'ML 

(  liang  M,'  ng  T'a n  張 孟談， 
minister  of  Viscount  Hsiang  of  Chao, 
21ML 

Chang  V  a  ^^^^  produced  a  SAu- 

king,  448. 
('hang  Po  Sunj; 張 伯 松， ">n- 

tpn»j)orary  of  Yang  Hsiung,  477. 

Chntig  S h a n j; 張商， 4fi4- 

Chang  T'a li  g  張湯， a  "11  uinn, 
:";7,  Hi 

Chang  Tse  Fang  S^^F* 房， '，" 

Chang  Liang.  A'Xi. 
C'lianfj;  Yi   ^ 说， a  native  of  W*i 

liad  a  double  ril,，  Uh^  30^  360. 

contPinporary  of  Su  Ch'in,  4H4. 
Chang  Wu 巧 武, inarqiiKs  of,  1  丁' -、. 
C  h'a  n  g 昌, personal  name  of  HVn 

Wang,  \n. 
rh'a'ig  *^，  mountain  in  Shansi, 
<'h';i  ng-l<. 長樂， a  palace.  :d 
(' h'ii  n  g  -  p'i  n g       ^p- ,  a  city  in  Shanxi, 

114T  117,  118.  136.  142.  a^£L 
Chao  king  of  Ch'm, 

C  li  ao  ft3»  diike  of  Hnn,  1  t. 

Chao  hH,  prince  of  Sung,  a  Paris, 

Chao  State 趙， in  Shansi,  74. 

^  LLL  LU>i  136,  lil*  lii^  ^Oi 
tiOM,  223,  229. 裏. 307.  321. 
508,  530. 

Chao  Kao 趙 a  eumicti,  who 
contrived  the  death  of  Fu  Su,  11 丄 
rino-ko 朝 ^ ，  a  city,  3BiL 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


:1 


(  ha..  Liang 趙 g,  99. 

( ' h a o  So 趙朔， n  relative  "f  ('hao 
Tun,  177. 

(' hao  Ti 船帝, Han  empemr,  456. 
Chao    T'o    趙他， king    of  the 

southern  Yiieh,  \2L  iiS2, 
Cliac  Tse  Tii 趙 子都， a  scholar. 

14Z 

(、h;i«>  Tun  盾， miiiister  of  Chin 
nnd  dcailly  enemy  of  T'u  An  A"«, 

rh'an  T'so    愚錯， received  the 

Sht/king  from  its  ttiding  place,  2nd 

cent,  n.c,  448,  450. 
n"1&  fa， 歸 s  i'"l)l'ei、  79,  139，  "； s, 

3G4. 細. 428.  44'). 
Che  Too  之^^ ，  mountain  in  Shan- 

tung,  2111. 
V  h'e  n 陳， family  in  Wei,  murdered 

its  sovereign,  440. 

(  h'en  State 陳， in  southern  Honnn, 

79i  li^i  13L  nils 撒 
Ch'cn  Chin 陳錄 = Ch'en  Tsr, 皿 

ChVng  Chung  Tse 陳仲 子， a 

recluse,  422. 
(，liV'n-liu 陳留， place  in  Hnnmi, 

riiV'ii  l''ing 陳 平， very  pottr.  hut 

fine  looking,  30:'. 
ChVn  S)u> 陳涉， kinj?  of  Ch'u,  22iL 

(，hV'n   Tse    陳子， a  disciple  itf 

Mencittft,  41!>. 
ChV'n  Tse  Hi" 陳 '、  scholar, 

mL 

Ch'cn  Yuan  |>j|| 元， admirer  of  the 
Tso-chuan,  4fi2* 

Cheng  正^^  Lady,  mint  of  the 
emperor  Wang  Mang.  became  emp- 
ress herself,  30<*. 

Cln'-ng  State  ^K,  in  Ilonan.  74.  1 18. 
122,  137，  208,  214,  235,  311, 机 
llio,  'ML 


Clu-ng  (Mii 鄭季， fatlM-r  of  Wfi 

Ch'ing, 滅 
Cht^ng- wu 政務, work  of  Watu/ 

Ch'uny,  on  government,  TOj  8^  87, 

88,  90,  ILL 
rhVng 成， king  of  Chou,  123,  129, 

14,;,  874,  424.  480, 
ChV  iifr 成， king  of  ChV  180i  2QL 

('liV'ng  chronicle  of  the  ('l"，， 

State,  8^  AhZ 
riiV'ng  Chi  Yo 成 季友， son  of 

Duke  II 議 of  Lu,  ^  231, 
( ' Wv n ^  Tang  jf^^f->  f""nder 

tlie  Shang  dynasty,  142. 
Ch'rnj;  Ti   成帝， Hnn  emperor. 

：则, 36：). 

ChVnf;  Yi"g  Ch'i 程 嬰齊， ad- 
herent of  Chao  So,  UlL 

Chi 稷 -一— -— Hoti  Chi,  Lord  Chi,  god 
of  cereals,  ancestor  of  the  Chou  dyn- 
asty, 145,         4fLL  hliL 

Chi  iamily  in  Lu、  74,  325,  AVh 
444. 

1" 至二  Ch;  Li,  son  of  Tan  Fu,  UiL 

hi  稷， "'rritory  in  Shans;,  '1\  1  ■ 

hi        surname  of  the  Chou  dynasty. 
318.  322. 

hi  l【uan  Tse 季桓 子， Prince 
Huan  of  Chi,  417. 
hi  Li 季 麼、， son  of  Tan  Fu,  12^ 
LLL  、 
'hi-mo  卽 靈 ， city  in  Shantung,  2^L 

' h i - n  a  n 濟南， city  in  Shantung, 


( ' h i - j) e i 濟北， place  in  Shantunffy 

2:;';. 

(，hi  su  chieh  yi 譏俗 節義， 
Censures  on  Morals,  work  of  Wang 
Ch'img,  l)^  7U  II. 

Chi  Tse  其子， a  noble  tinder 
Chou  Hsin,  ■' )■")  -!. 

Chi  Tse 季子， prince  of  Wu.  523. 


5：)2 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


( ' h  i  -  y  a  n  j;  j^f  f^f ,  in  Shantung,  UiLL  |  ri»i«'li  .1  u 籍孺， 》  minion.  UhL 
濟陽， palacr,  182,  iMli !  t'liieli  K  uei  tyrnnt,  last  emp 

323,  L 

Ch i  Yen   % 宝音, statesman  under 

Han  Wu  Ti,  ILL 
C'li'i 祀， State  in  Honan,  LliL 

(1h'i  Lady,  a  concubine  i>f  Hon 

Kao  Tsu,  ni8s.san'e<]  by  the  Em  press 

Lu  Ifou,  2ML 
Ch'i 齊， State  in  Shantung,  U2,  HL 

127.  147,  101.  172.  176.  206,  '2 IS. 


•J--M;t  232.  238.  24：).  280,  310,  341. 
:\  \  t,  379.  U9.  -121,  42::.  427, 風 
410,  4'>(i.  4H3.  481.  41»1,  4<M>.  QiLL 


sucrossnr  ol'  tlic  KiniXTor 


= llnu  Chi.  :>1S. 


eror  of  the  Hsia  dynasty,  37.">, 
，l"en，  j^p,   name  of  terrace  near 
Chang-an,  4H>j. 

liiw 簡， viscount  a(  Chao,  U6.  202. 
223.  307.  321. 
，h"'n 簡， duke  of  Vm, 

' li  i e n -clia  ii g  $ 者 nanir  of  a 

palace  of  the  Han  emperors, 
赢 

' (MiiJMi-lun  ^^論 ， （'riticnl  Hcllec- 

tions,  work  of  Tsrit  Yen,  iii. 
(hi on  Ti 簡狄， mother  of  /,."',: 力， 
AM. 


kianf/,  ti£. 

rh'i  Chi 棄疾. 1'iinre  (Miili 知， territory  in  Chin,  226,  2211 


I   HI 、二鄭 Mov,  distrirt  in  ('ht 


in 


Cli'i-hiiien  rp.        »listi  ict  in  An/im\  («),  j 

VWl  Li""g        梁， an  ,,m,<,r  °f  (Mnh  H^T^n  of  King  Ch'^u,  ofCh'u. 
Ch'i,  112,11^11^  ,  207 

Ch  i  Shon^       )\}},  made  a  relicllinn  C\i\h 寧， iimsic-ina.ster  of  Lu,  4fi7. 

Iiili 掷， father  of  Lady  Cht'ng^  30f>. 
Iiih-fu 眞符， unlucky  day,      1  - 
li'i  li-)isien 赤縣， （'liina,  2iiiL 
li  ill  IS ，ing  n  magician. 

1»  i  li  Yu  -^j-        a  legendary  person. 
1 14.  2iii  28^  442. 
li  i  n  Stat,'  in  Shansi,  88,  ili, 

1  ;•>:''•  16'2.  177,  189, 細, 2QiL 


Chin,  in  the  'ith  cent.  ii.c.  HS'i. , ( 
(I"  Tiao   K'a  i 漆雕 開， pl.ilo- 
soplier,  dixcipU'  of  Confucius.  .'<S4. 
( ' li  i  ;i  -    rhia  Yi,  ^         a  j>n(>t,  on 

destiny,  U8,  "W., 
Chiang 系争， a  pi-incipalitv  in  S/ianxi\ 
308, 

Chiang  Yuan 姜原， motlier  ot'JIou  '- ( 

Chi,         222.  41LL 
Ch'ia  ng  tribes  in  the  \Wst  of 

China,  lii£L 
Cli'ia      ,1  uiifj;  westrni  hur- 

harians,  500. 
( ' h  i  a  o  j"^,  mountain  in   Kanxu  i»r 

Sh-mi，  where  Huang  Ti  wns  buried. 

Chieh  #   二  (l"<h  Kuei.  00,  47H. 

Chieh  and  (lion 继脉 llii  210, 
318,  4S1.  4H7.  507,  o27,  hAL 


211,  214,  -J-20.  2^L 组 232, 
248,  321.  MO.  3(J9.  457.  4<>o,  497, 
500,  oiilL 
Chili  >^>,  name  of  Tung  Fany  So, 

Chin  Ch nan  n  native  of 

A'       Chij  1l.\0. 

< ' hi n  y  a  n g  ^ "陽， city  in  Sha"", 
99') 

rh'iii  State 秦， in  Shms;,  6!^  1H>. 
114.  117,  122.  \My.  147.  UfJ, 直 


Index  of  Proper  Xames. 


170.  178.         2H.         305,  311. 

328.  H7ii.  485,         4^  492,  500, 

503,  o^lL 
(h'in  dynasty 秦， 249-201;  b.,'.， 

82i  95i  13^  lliL  280,  lU^ 

；»27.  447.  450,  459, 風 490,  50 fi. 
(  h'in   epoch 秦. 218.  27^  27^ 

ATL  、 
('h'in  II si  ^* 息， smashed  his  head, 

(  h'in  Shih  Hii:i  nK  Ti 秦 始皇， 
founder  of  th«*  C/i'in  dynasty,  rend- 
itig  Han  Fei  Tsf,  72.  17h.  Inirned 
the  hooks,  IKLL  2Hii  "230. 
■ILL  449,  4U0,  41*^ 廳. 

('Iiiiig       ,  tributary  of  the  Huantj-htK 
碰 

( ' h i n g  jji|j，  iiiountain  in. Shmsi,  332. 
(，hinK  Jj{、  duke  ol"  Suny. 
( ' liiiii;  l^V.  duke  of  ('Am,  177. 
Cliiii^  };J、  dtik(>  of  Ch'i,  21:;. 
Ching- chiiii  - 并 ij 州， place  in  //"/,''/, 

('hing  ('h'ou        J"/-,  an  "fficer  of 
OCi,  122. 

riling  ―  ('hing  Fang  ^ ^房， n'm- 
mentator  of  the  Y iking,  2S;{. 

II <>        ^f4I'  wept  t<«a i-s  of 
MonH,  .'iQI- 

('hing  K'o  —祥 |J#J，  attcmptrd  t,i  ;is- 
sassinate  Ch'in  Shih  Huang  7V'  1 1!L 

(  iiing  Ti  ^"！"  Han  empm'r,  17!,, 

309, 皿 
riling  T 

se  jrjl  viscount  Chiny 
of  Chao,  2Q1L 
( hinK  Tso  Fei 剕 次非， ^ 
(  lung  Tu 慶都， Yar/s  mother,  MIL 

('hinR-ho       河, prefecture  in  Ho- 
nan,  179, 


Chliug  Pu  ，^、 布， a  criminal,  who 
liecnine  a  prince  308,  king  of  Jhtai- 
nan.  attacked  by  Han  Kao  7>«,  148. 

Chi ii         f^rnoial  of  CKw.  506. 

f1h  in-cho  n 九腐， tril>e  in  AnnnvK 

Chi  ii -chia  ，  circuit  in  An- 

hui, 

(1liiu  Kan 咎犯， officer  of  Chi," 
1S9.  23^ 

(，li'"i"g  Sang  ―  Shao  Hao, 

Cljo-yuiiK 著雍， territory,  2QE 
( ' h t) ii 糸、 j'  -    Chmi  Ilsin,  last  i'mp,'r，>r 

of  the  Shang  dynasty,  1'2 1  -         1  So. 

187. 魁 22K  244,  -J8S,  81L 

aha.  478.  4H2.  48^  •'>!  >• 

( 'liou  ^^，  :i  small  place1  in  f'liL  liii 
(  Ikiii  dy nasty 周， 1 122-24U  ».. 

172,  1ST,  202,  ^  'Ji^  :iiiL 

•->!>；>. ：慨 m,  359,  ^()L  42^  430, 

4 .'>：),  4t;4.  4<>7.  47:),  ■,  4H4,  481>. 

518,  52^  aM- 
(  liou  ^  period,  U4,  m 

173.  aQi 

(liou  ^  proph-.  22^  «9j  iiLL 
(  liou 周 Stat«-,  Lis. 艇 388.  HI. 

(' ho  ii         kingdom  of  tilt*  (>hou  dy- 

niisty  in  Shensi,  4~>>. 
Chou  rii'juig  S Ii  r n ^  nn 

author,  4<;t，. 
(  liou  rii'ing  (  hV'ii 周 ]lj 巨， ina- 

jor-douio  of  Shi  Huang  Ti,  449.  4<>0 
(，l">ii  K'ing 周必， D'ikc  ("•  d/M. 

hnulier  of  Wm  Wo"y，  98,  12L  12^ 

125.  12!),  146,  186,  205,  304,  31H, 

ii±  32i  1^  440,  4Mi 
('Im)u  Li  j^J  jjj1^ ,  Book  ol'  Rites  «if 

tin;  (.'/""/，  4;*>'>. 
('liou  Ya  K u 爛 亞 genera !  ami 

chief  minister  under  Han  W^n  Ti, 
1 4' 人 ：獻 


oogle 


554 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


( l.ouYi 崩漏 二  、';k""j  of  tl"'A,,„ 
dynasty,  4M. 

( ' li  ii  朱, tributary  of  the  Ssr  in  Shan- 
tung, 1  >>4. 

Chu 柱， 'Spirit  of  the  Grain,  5 1 H. 

Chu  Fu  Yen 主义 假. enemy  of 

Tung  Chuny  Shu.  tlx  1  ^ 
i'Uu  Yung 成融， G，''""s  of  Siiin- 

iurr  and  Kire.  .rilh. 
(h  u  State  in  llupn  arul  Hunan. 

SH,  KiL  LLiii  Lii 逃 LUL  122, 
140.  156.  1  .V.»,  KiO,  17';,  18'丄 -207. 
1>«K». '良 301.  371.  37t>.  401.  4.>. 
1:,7, 核, 直 
(  li'ti-t'so 楚辭， Elegies  of  Ch'u, 
LLL 

C h ii  Va  Yu  蓝 伯玉， '、 discijile 
of  Corifuciw,  6*^  9/^  1 1  ■). 

Clni  P'ing 鹿 平 = Cfi'"  y"""， 
his  death,  lAiL 

('li'ii  Yuan  屈原, l:""«)"s  poet, 
who  drowned  himself,  1  l'.i.  12 J, 
T22,  MIL 

Chuan  Hsii 驗王 |,  mythical  emp- 
eror, 89,  m  004,  32^  ^ 
.•>!(；.  518.  522. 

Chuan  Yi 傳毅， n  sell, 山"、 撒 

('liHan        ,  inusic-inastcr  of  Wn\ 

Cliuan^  ^  j^,  dukr  of  L".  274. 
('huan^  king  of      u.  1 22. 

('li'inng  Ch'iat)  莊 《喬， a  rolthcr, 

('hiijnig  Sli  ii         又， minister  of  f.u, 

('liuang  TseYi  ^  -jp-  ^ ,  a  j>lian- 
tom,  minister  of  Duke  Chien  of  Yen. 

C'huang  and  Yil 莊^^  two  quart- 
ers in  tlic  cn pital  of  Ch'i,  379. 

('li'uang-ling 春 | 凌. H""a'i、 
1HL 


Cliueli-li 闕取， l)lace  whei*e  Om- 

fuchis  died,  1  .">.*>. 
Ch'un-cli'iu    荐秋， the  Spring 

and  Auttiiun"  Chronicle  o( Confucius. 

8^  8^  24^  274,  277,  3^ 邁 

451.  4：>3.  4-Vi.  457.         ML  iiilL 

465,  4»ih. 

(  h'un-ch'iii 春秋 epoch,  722-481 
H.c.  HiiL  ILL 

Imiii  SIh'  ii        中， l"'i"fe  "f,  501- 
h  u  n  Sliani; 君上， p<、rs"nal  name 
of  the  Kruperor  Ch'Atg  T>.  ML 
h'ing 種， a  jirefcct,  310. 
hung 重 =r  Knu  Many,  Genius  of 
Spring.  iliL 

iiuii^-climt 中 州 ― llnnan,  HZ- 
liun^  ('  hn  n 終^ •  censor,  iilX. 
hung  Hang  ( '  h  a  o  Tsr 中行 
JJ3 子， minister  of  Chin.  22fi. 
ClningHangMiTse 中行 密子. 

father  of  Chung  Hang  Yin,  ")37. 
rhung  Hang  Yin    中 行寅， a 
nobleuinn  of  ('Am.  o'M'i. 
iung-j»'n  '仲 任， style  of  Wang 
Ch  ung,  ILL 
ung  Knng  仲 弓 ， disciple  of 
Cfm/uch//t,  8_L 

iiin^-tiiou 中 牟， a  city  in  li'-'nnn, 

u  n  g  •  s  li  a  ii  中山, territory  in 
Chili,  22fL 
itng  Tse  伸子， daughter  of 
Duke  Wu  of  Surip.  Iind  a  writing 
on  her  pnlii)T  5*^  2^7.  2\K>. 
ung  Yung 伸 雍 ， son  of  T"u 
Fv,  UL 

CU'u  ng  Krh 重 If  ，  prince  of  ('hi'" 

232.  -m,  Ml£ 

('li'iing  Lnn 充蘭， petty  officer. 
132,  180. 

Cli'nng  Y  u  充廣， a  follower  of 
Mtncivs,  423. 


( ' 


(h 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


(！ on fucianists  fj^j >  oppose  the 
principle  of  spantaneity,  81*  102,  be- 
lieve in  destiny,  13H.  regard  Con- 
fucius  as  their  master, 

Confucius 孔"^ *，  spoke  of  destiny* 
67^  as  official  hml  no  aversions,  6H» 
lost  a  horse,  ijO^  eating  a  peach,  74^ 
his  works  not  read,  7^  nobody 
more,  talented,  7^  his  linrdships, 
rod"  ( 'anfucius  and  Me  TV  noble  of 
themselves,  but  of  low  rank,  79^  both 
Sages,  8L  Confucius  and  Mi  TV,  83, 
4t>8,  477,  Confucius  on  jioetry,  89, 
avoided  all  pomp,  {ML  on  n  carved 
mulberry-leaf,,  96j  on  Yao  nn<]  Shun^ 
HHt  his  t>lissful  forgetfulness,  1(>0, 
his  abilities  in  various  arts, 
afraid  of  Yang  //w,  107,  his  know- 
ledge, 120，  as  wise  <is  Confucius 、  1 45, 
Can/uchts  on  life  and  death,  147,  on 
Yen  HuVs  death,  1  r,  1  ，  uu  good  fur- 
tmie,  1 52,  passing  the  city  gate  of 
La9  end"  inferior  to  Shtin,  155,  seri- 
ously ill,  15S.  Confucius  on  a  white 
calf,  159,  Cotifucius  and  Po  Niu、 
Confucius  did  not  become  an  finp- 
eror,  l^tf.  thtifvci^ts  on  divination, 
182,  on  Heaven's  speaking,  184,  on 
an  omen,  188，  burying  his  mother, 
197，  buried  opposite  t"  the  Sse 
river,  22:;，  on  inctoors,  274,  270, , 
deeply  impressed  by  a  thunderst< h'iiu 
295,  afraid  of  Yang  //«,  his 
arms  turning  backwards,  304，  360, 
prognosticated  for  T*an  T*ai  Tsc  YU9 
31 1,  in  Ch^ng,  311,  naturally  born, 
322,  playing  the  Jlute,  :d  on  drag- 
ons, :m  on  Jjao  Tse  hrinp  like  a 
dragon,  358,  ； i  holy  man,  359,  re- 
sembling Yu  Jo%  ：化 0,  compared  with 
Zke  tCang,  IU>  I  ，  and  S/iao  Cheng  Mao, 
362,  no  unicorn  appeared  during 
his  time,  365,  unlike  his  father  nnd 
his  sunf  his  disciples,  37:),  (m 

people  above  nnd  below  the  nverap;**. 


38(3,  as  a  boy  playing  with  sacri- 
ficial vessels,  387.  the  Nestor  in 
wisdum  and  virtue,  387,  Criticisms 
on  Confucius,  Chap.  XXXIII,  Con- 
fucius a  Sage,  425,  did  not  become 
an  emperor,  431，  on  a  sacrificml 
sheep,  434,  on  the  three  dynasties, 
44 1，  Confucius  transmitted  the  Shu- 
king,  447,  450,  his  school  demolish- 
ed, 448,  composed  the  CKun-cKit" 
l.-'l,  452.  Confucius  on  Rites,  45r>, 
Confucius  and  the  Analects,  45 1>,  his 
house  pierced,  eod^  ambiguity  not  to 
his  mind,  458*  a  Tso-chuan  found  in 
hin  house,  462,  Confucms  did  not 
speak  of  strange  things,  4<>3,  his 
works  finished  by  Tung  Chuny  Sku, 
-HiG,  Confucius  on  the  music-master 
Chik、  end.,  wrote  the  CfCan-cKiu, 
V)H^  on  the  Chou  epoch,  471,  on 
Yao%  477%  on  Chous  wickedness, 
478.  on  Shun  and  7«,  482,  Can- 
fucius  could  drink  a  hundred  gallons, 
486，  wandering  about,  499,  asking 
about  Kung  Shu  Wen  Tsef  500,  on 
Kao  Tse^  501,  Confucius  and  his 
dog,  :>22,  on  the  sacrifice  to  Earth, 
iV」3,  on  destiny,  527,  Confucius  a 
sage,  eod, 

E. 

Erh  Shih  HuanK  Ti  二世 皇帝， 
son  of  the  rmp(?ror  CKin  Shih  Huang 
7V，  1GL  219, 

F. 

Ka  personal  name  of  Wtt  Wang. 

22 

F  a  -  y  e  n 法- ^  ，  work  of  Yang  Ihiung. 

Fan  ^jj,  a  family  name,  355> 

Fan 樊， Lady,  of  C",  122. 

Y  a  ii  、j 凡, grandfather  of  Wnng(*h'Hng、 
ILL 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Fa ii  (  li  ih        jtj\  ,  disriplr  of  (  on- 

F an-ch' ii  a  n  |J 反 ，  place  wherr 
Yen  Ti  was  vanqiiishnl  hy  Huang 
Ti,  ilfi. 

I*' a n  II stian  Tse 《£官^*，  oHlw 

of  Chin,  20^  ami. 

Fan  K  uai 焚哈. partisan  of  Han 

Kao  Tsu，  1 7S. 
Fa  n-kuei  ^ ^魁， h  place, 

V  a  n  Li  ^ ^翁， a  uiinist(ir  of  Yiieh^ 

Fan  Shu 范叔， atlark^l  tlie  Tso- 

chua?i.  4i\%2. 
Fan  Sui  H 唯 ， a  i""iv('  UV/. 

almost  hrntrn  to  clrnth,   115,  14? 

V a  n  W  rit  Tse 《^ 女子， 

of  Chin,  22fi. 
Fang  J^f，  place  in  Shantung^  1  !>7. 

V  ix  ng-fV  ng 防 威 *  jn  ince  u[\  a  "(，• 
liath,  flli 舰 

Fei  Iiien  廉， a  ministrr  oi  King 
Chnu,  482. 

V  v\\  river  in  Shnnsi,  *2H0. 

F r  u-yia  陰， place  in  Shan^K  f>0H. 
F  0  ti  p;   ^-，    place  in  Kin svj.su ^    1 36. 

l'、'ng  ^ ，- 水， rivor  in  t>hmsiy  MO. 
Frng  Po 風伯， Wind  (""1,  alL 

V  w  "^Jj  ,  manjuis  of,  minister  of  Kin^ 

V  u  C hing 秋^ |J，  disciple  of  K  uuy 
An  Ktm,  4.rw; 

Yn  11  o  u       ^"，  wifv  of  the  Kniperor 

Yuan  77,  21K 
Fu  Hsi 彩戲 or 伏 義,， nn- 

cient  mythical  emperor,  70,  87^  4o4. 

F  u  -  hsi  ng  j|j 刑， cliaptrr  on  Punish- 
ments in  the  Skuking、  1 14,  IH 


Ku-sa  ii s  rrginu  where  th'， 

sun  rises.  2 Ho.  271，  a  trct，，  273. 

V  u  Sli  rn  j;  ^^yCTT ,  preserved  the 
Shuking,  447,  450. 

F  u-shili  ,  place  in  S/tensi^  211. 

r  u  s  u  f ！， *f、*  son     W/h  SArA 

Huang  Ti,  1 14. 
Ku  Tse  (Mnen 必 子, 签, philo- 

sopher.  ^H4. 
1'、  u  -  y  u  ,  State  in  Ijiantv,i 甘、 1  ，：、 

G. 

(i  <、m  ini    ]|J 并， "faster"  Well 
eonstrllation  i  rached  l>y  the  sun  in 
sununer,  W 丄 

(r  obi  ^jff^、^|^,  *4  Flyinj;  sand",  wcsJ- 
vvn  limit  of  the  t-arth.  "2">5^  2atL 

H. 

II.'iii  H  dynasty.  ^i>2  n.t  .-220 
^  84,  114,  hLL  12^.  liL 

2 IS.  327,  3,;4.  382,  4.^；. 
483. 

11  nn 漢 epoch,  8^  278,  466, 

Han  .  torritory  in  Shanxi.  HS^  154. 
204. 

H  n  n  a  111 u en  t  of  the  Ynn//t<r. 

:'、r>:)， 

1 1  ;i  n  An  Kuo  [l?^ «  counsellor 

of  Ilan  Ti, 
II  a  n  C  lift e h 韓 鳅 ， official  in  <、h,n, 

II  an -eh  ii       《奚 中 , in  Shp'isi,  459. 

Han  Fei  Tse  韓非 Taoist 
philosopher,  72,  the  bulk  of  his 
work,  78j  83;  assassinated  hy  Li 
Sse,  170,  disparages  divination.  1 8", 
on  dragons,  354;  3<>5,  on  style,  414. 
Chap.  XXXV; 碰 

H  n  t)  Hsi  u  信, hRlpiuate  of  Han 
Kao  Tsu,  148,  3QIu 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


f)57 


Han  Usnau  Tsc  韓官 子， min- 
ister of  Chin,  211  — 

H  a  ii  K  a  o  Tsu 漢高狐 ， founder 
of  the  Han  (Ivnasiv,  1M,  17^ 
181.  4H7. 

Han  Man 汗漫， genius,  XV.K 

Han  Wu  Ti  see  Wu  Ti， 

Uau 鎮池， lake  n«'ar  Hsi-an-fu,  2SL 

Uo 和 of  Chiny  --  Pim  Ho,  hilL 

H"    ChT,    Ping 霍 去病， //"« 

11  o  K  uung  regent  lor  Han 

Chao  Ti,  U1L 
Uo  Lii 鬧魔， king  of  Wu. 肩. 
Ho-noi 河 內， city  in  H" 請. i,  44H. 
Ho-|)ei 河北， in  Shan.si,  181, 

Ho-tung 河東, a  circuit  in  i>Aansi, 
17'J.  AUK 

lion  ri" 后稷， Lord  of  Agriculture. 
130,  174,  318.  322. 


I  I'm  P'u  Tse 侯 鋪子, adlierent 

"f  Han  Fei  Tse,  4BiL 
Hon  Tu  ^土，  Lord  of  tlie  Soil, 

•m 

ILsi 愤， duke  of  Lu,  247,  2I1L 

Hsi 熙 = iisuan  Miny 左冥， （；" d 

of  Winter, 
Hsi  (  h'i  «hu 两 ^；術 ， olficer  ,"• 

Ch'in,  ：)()0. 
llsi   Chung    奚仲， inv*— 'iit<»r  of 

chariots,  8L  2£L 
Hsi-liu 糸田 柳， region  when'  the 

sun  sets,  2ii^. 
llsi  MC* n  Pa o    阁門 豹， 謂 thv 

of  the  oth  cent.  ，,.<'.,  122^  :^H1 . 
Hsi  Wang  Mu 西王 付， a  Taoist 

goddess,  H 
11s  i  a   Q   dynasty,  2"J< ».">-!  7(51； 
214,  230.  235,  318.         ：\：\：,.  :;.V,, 
4M,J7^  m 裏 illL  ilii 
Hsia 


llsia  kuo    卜 國，" lu、vei'  capital  " 

of  Chin,  2mL 
Hsia  pei    |、         place  in  Kiatuf.su, 

'':r. 

llsia  t'a  i 夏' 皇， place  wiiere  Cltmij 

Tany  was  confined,  14-> 
Hsia   Yii   夏育, lumoiis   for  his 

strength,  4K4 
Usiang  jg,  duke  of  Ch  i,  \J^_  245. 
Ilsi.ing  ^-,  duke  of  Chin,  223,  500. 
llsiang  ^  king  of  Ch'u. 
llsiang  viscmint  of  ( 'hart,  1 16, 

117,  308. 
Hsiang  Yj£  二  Chao  //.、''•"/,、'/，  of 

Ch'ht,  1M. 
II  si  a" g 象， Shun's  wicked  hrotlier, 

173. 

llsia  ng -a  n  ^         city  in  A'lhui, 

― 

II  siang  f'liuang 适莊， attempted 

to  kill  Han  Kao  Tsu,  HiL 
llsia  ii ^  Man  Fu 項 曼- 都， ；1  'l'a<»- 

ist  genius,  34". 
II  si  a       Po 巧 伯， saved  JIau  Kao 

Tsu's  life,  mL 
Hsia  n«  Yu 《 羽， rival  of  Han 

Kao  Tsu,  1  :!:i，、】 37.  178,  30:,.  ：；1'.', 


324.  -IK;},  ：)：{0. 


family  scat  of  Yii  <iiul 
Hsia  dynasty  in  If  "nan,  t.'»H. . 


Hsiao  j^,  duke  of  ('.Kin,  61). 

Hsiao  Chang  Ti 孝 韋帝， Han 

emperor,  372. 
Hsiao  C h' Ti 孝成 帝二 CKnuj 

Ti,  Han  emperor,  123.  448. 
Hsiao  Ching  Ti 孝^; 帝二  Chiny 

Ti,  Han  emperor,  44— S— 
Hsian  Hui 孝惠， the  emperor  Hui 

Ti.  son  of  Kao  Tsu  and  Lii  Hou, 
Hsiao  Hsuan  Ti 牽官 帝, Ha" 

pmj.eror,  ：?59.  3«；7.  370.  44H 

Hsiao   MinK   Ti 孝 明帝， Hon 

iMtiperor,  372.  47«L 
Ilsino  \\T(- n  Ti  see  W^ht  77,  40^  MliL 


558 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Hsiao  Wu  =  Hsiao  Wu  7V,  l^L 
Hsiao  Wu  Ti 孝武帝 = T" 
Han  emperor,  8i»  337,  :d  ^CL  j 
II si cli 樊， minister  tA'Shun,  145,  3 IS, 

3^  4114, 慨 oUL  h^L 
\\ sieli  j^，  small  principality  in  Shan-  ^ 

tuny,  41!,. 
Hsien 默， （Ink,'  of  Chin,  'iiL 

H  s  i c  i) 敝， viscount  of  ^Ye^,  354. 

Hsien  -    Yuan  S-se 憲， disciple  of] 

Confucius,  noted  for  his  love  of  pov- 

ei-ty,  TiL 

llsien-ming 咸銘， work  of  Yuan 

W^n  Shu, 碰 
Usien-yanj; 威 陽， c^y  ,,ear  ^s '- 

an-/u,  MIL  13iL 
llsiii-l'rii^ 新 ^；,  a  place  in  Sh*>",s;、 

3"4. 

Hsin-hsn 新序， New  Intruduction, 

work  of  Liu  Hsiang,  MIL 
llsin  Liiig 信陵， prince  of.a64.aDl. 
Usin-lun 新諭， New  Reilertions, 

work  of  Huan  f  'Aim  Shan,  H7, 
llsin-tu 新都， territory  in  Honan, 

硫 

Hsin-yi'i 新語， New  Words,  woik 

of  Lu  (，hia、  ilia- 
1 1  s  i  n  Yn  a  i、 

P'i"g 新 坦平， u"  th(' 
Chrm  tripods,  6<>.S. 

lis iu 修， God  of  WinttMv  oJA 

Hsiung  Ch'ii  Tse 熊 渠子， a  re- 

ninrkable  how-man,  497. 
Usinng-nu 匈奴， Turkisli  tribes. 

124,  168.  174.  2';3, 雄 
Ilsii 馀， .small  State  in  HujK-i,  4; 化, 

Hsii 徐, State  in  AnAtti,  153i 

Ilsii 徐， one  of  the  Nine  Provinces, 

in  Shantutu/,  and  its  aborigines,  -I'.'  t. 
1 1  s H  (' it i u  須賈， an  olBcer  <"•  Wti. 

11").  、 
II sit  Fu  ^午 賀， a  fortum-teller, 

ML 


lis  it  Shu  g'^p^C,   famous   tur  his 

magnanimity,  47»>. 
II sit  Yu 許由， henniL  mL 
Hsu  Y ii e h 徐樂， a  scli«>lar,  LLL 
lUitun 宣， king  of  Chu,  202, 

2iilL  一 
H  s  u  a  n  M  i  n  g  ^ 冥， God  of  Winter. 

llKiiun  Ti 官 帝 ， emperor  ―  Hsiao 
Hsiian  Ti,  'iO^         370.  4^  45<i, 

1 1  s  ii  a  n  -  y  u  a  n 軒 賴 , a  constellatiun, 
21LL 

lis iiii  Tse 荀子 = Sim  Ch'ing,  g3. 
II situ  Yen  ^J^,  officer  ol"  Chin, 

U  u 胡， alun'iginal  tribes  in  the  North, 

I  "9,  226,  hM. 
11  u  1【 a  i 胡亥二  Erh  Shih  Huang  77' 

11  u  Mu 胡 ^J:,  cominentator  of  the 

'Ch'un  cA'i'm,  4H2. 
11  u  Til 狐突. officer  of  Chin.  mL 
II  ii  a 滑， a  moiinUiin,  21:3. 
It  ua  Shih 華士，  scholar  of  Ch  i, 

Am. 碰 

II  u  a  -  y  a  n g 華陽， princess  of,  LiL 
II  ua-yin    華陰， |"ace  in  Shnsi. 

II  u a  Yuau 華元, general  ol*  Sun^. 
159. 

11  ii  a  i         river  in  Honan  and  A"h、". 

II uai  ^^，  aboriginal  tribes.  MiL. 
' II  uai  i|^，  king  of  Ch'u.  113. 

II  ua  i-nuu 淮南， princedom  in  An- 
/""，  2}^         335^  MiL 

11  uai  Nan  Tse 淮南 子， l,rince 
of  Huai-nan  famous  Taoist  philo- 
sopher, 75,  89j  on  fnte,  148,  27L 
337. 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Iluai-yung 淮 陽 ， a  State  in  llonan, 
'Ms  ilii. 

11  u an 桓， duke  of  Ch'i,  {XL  {Ms 

172.  1 7';,  M4, 
II  ii  ?i  ii 桓， duke  of  C/i'in,  21L 
11  uan  jj~>g ,  duke  of  Lu,  4.ri7. 
II  uan  K'u a n  桓寬， writer  of  the 

1st  cent,  u.c,  4(;i"i. 
II  uan  Lung       龍, a  dragon-keeper 

under  Shun,  354. 
Uuau  Tan 桓昌 f|   ―  Huan  Chiin 

Shan 桓君山 , 11  scholar,  HL  Mi 

Huang  Shili 黄石 必， Mr. Yellow- 
Stone,  9^  ,^>8. 

Huang  Ti  黄帝， legendary  em- 
peror, 82^  Huang  Ti  nnA  Lao  Tse.  Hl>, 
both  inactive,  98_;  10' 丄  the  school 
of  Huang  Ti  arid  La"  Tse  arguing 
on  s]>ontaneity.  ItiOj  HL  113,  22L 
243.  304,  322,  324,  332, 亂 mL 
:\:>%  378,  4*14^  .ILL  o22s 

Huang  T*se  K  ung 

黄^ d  a 
minister  of  Han  Hsiian  Ti,  307. 

Hui  ^  duke  of  Chin,  20^ 息 
Hui 愈, duke  of  Lu,  '237^  2iiiL 
II ui 惠， king  of  CA'u,  IfA). 
11  ui  king  ol'  Liamj  ―  Wei,  418. 

Hui  Ti 惠帝， Han  emperui-,  mL 

II ung-fun 洪 0q ， Flood  Regulation, 
chapter  of  the  Shukingt  12S,  UiiL 
246,  282.  452.  454. 

Hung  Ju 閑^ |，  a  minion,  1  it'.i. 

iiung-nuiig 弘爲， city  in  Hf 赠 n. 

Hung  Yen 弘演， a  loyal  official 
of  Duke  L  «f  Wei,  475^ 抵 

11  uo-t'ai  ^*  ^j^,  UKiuntain  in  Shanxi, 
221L 

H  y  a d  e s  ^.,  when  the  moon  ap- 
proaches them,  it  rains,  2. 


1  夷， eastern  barharians,  4fl  1. 
I  -  k  i  n  g  see  Yikintj. 
1  Kuan 悅' 直, " M'(i'<*.tary  State, 
309. 

I  Ti  夷^! C，  barharinn  trihes,  276. 

1  W  u  夷^ "，  pi'ince  of  Chin, 

I- yang 宜 陽， city  in  Honan-/u,  lliL 

J. 

Jan  Y  it  disciple  ofChn/ucim, 

ALL 

Japanese  俊 人 ， «rifl5. 

.lo  river.  242, 

J  u-nun 汝南， place  in  Honnn,  SI» 

Jupiter 歳単， star,  US,  &2iL 

J  a  Sho ii 尊 "t'nius  ol' Autumn, 

,1  u  Yi  ^jp 彦， son  of  linn  Kao  Tsh, 

puisoucd  by  Lu  l〖ou,  •」 1 
Jung  ^^，  western  barbarians.  '22<>, 


•19  t. 


K. 


K  a  i 該 ■=  Jh  Shou,  Genius  ofAutiunn, 
518. 

K  u  ii  -  c  ti  i  a  n  g      »|^- .  a  famous  sword, 

1C  a n  -  c  h*  U  a  u  palac«t  near 

Chany-an,  124. 
K'ang 康， king  of  CAou,  316,  480, 

494. 

K'ang  J^，  king  of  Ch'u,  17fi. 
K'ang  Shu 嵌 ,j 汉， broth  it  of  Chnu 

Kung,  HL  lM, 魏 
K'angTse 康 子 = Chi K 'any,  head 

of  the  Chi  family  in  Lu、  403. 
Kau  Huang  Ti 高皇 帝二  " 

Tsu,  2JJL 

Kau  Tse 告子， philosopher,  op- 
ponent of  Mencitis.  3HI'». 


5(H) 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Kuo  Tse  Ka" 卨 子7*，  （lisc"'h' 
of  Confucius.  alU. 

K  an  Tsu 高 肌 二  IIan  Ka°  Ts，'，  ^ 
1_17^  V.\1.  i:?7,  I  t8,  178.  ，K:),  217, 
HO'i.  :U«>.  48：^,  MIL 

*^ ,  Shnmj  t'liijicroi'. 


Kuan  Ku 港夫， S«"«,al  . of  U 
•2nd  cent.  ».c,  LLL 【 ^AL 道 


\\  ■   '  T  - ':  高 


317,  iiSx  imL 


Kao  Yuo 辠陶， ""'"ster  oH". 

^鉱； il ^雄 m 艇 

Kian«-nan 江南， s""th 

Yam/L'ie, 鱼 直 
Kiang-pei 江北， i'"'"1   o1'  th' 

Yanytse,  it'Mt 
Ko  prince  '»"'"，  i^Si 

1"  u  ( '  1"  t' " 勾 踐， king  of  Yiit  h, 識 

Kou  Lun- 勾 #  二仏" Tv，  Lord 

of  the  S'"l,  il^ 
Kou  Mans  |^^IeniusurSl,ri"^ 

5  IS. 

K  ii .  r  h'  n  n       城， """"itaiu  in  .、'/,""- 

. hmg,  'l'M>. 
K, 卜 it'll 姑^ ：,  |>l»ce  in  Shantmuj. 

Ku  Liang  '|J 梁. commentator  of 

ttu;  Vh'un  ch'iu, 巡 
Ku    Lian«   (  l.ih  fi^!-S(  二  A'" 

Lia，"j，  丄 
K»  I'u  Tse 门 "ng 姑布子 卿' 
uffiefM-  mChou).  physiognomist, 

KU.  22<i.  ML 
K..  Sou  y^lgj,  the  unieeling  lather 

,"•  grvat  Shun,  17：^,  M!L 
K  u  T.si-  Y  i.n 谷子 雲二  A'» 

Ku  Yung 芬东， "ss""sl.  HH, 邀 

K*n  m  =  Ti  K  u 帝鬱， 

Kuan-fhin 観、 率. — 'e  in  ""顏 ' 
HiL 

K„an-cl.ii 關睢， Ode  <.f  tlw* 

Shikiny,  4(17. 
Kn an  ClMin- 转仲， "'卿 '、 

istt-r  of  Duke  //"。"  o(('h'i.  UHk 

14".  176,  4,W,  4HL 


Riiuu  Ka(. 貫高， minister  aH'hao, 
attempted  to  murder  Han  Kao  Tsu, 
ILL 

K  uauSUu  Usien 昝 叔鮮' "^1"'1' 

2 山 

K.i  a  ii  Tse 昝子二  Kuany  Ch"wj， 

Kuang  (  hili  K u e i 医 稱圭， a 

snvunt,  147. 
Kuang-hnu 廣漢， ^n  in 

chuan.  1H0. 
K  u  a  n  g  K  u  o 腐' 國， younger  brother 
ol"  the  empress-dowager  Tim,  lliL 
Kuang-ling 廣陵， place  in  Kiang- 

Kuang  W.-n  Po 廣女伯 ，蔽 ial' 

Kuang  Wu  Ti 光 武帝' Han 

emperor,  90,  U^i  1^  ^  ^ 
^12.  323.  'Muu  41)^ 息 
Iv'nanjr 喊, lnu.sic-inaster,  I^i 


K' 議 g  (  hannTse 医 章子， 1"妙 

ofliccr  of  the  Ch'i  State,  l^L 
K'ua  ni;  riiin'h 狂 scliohir  "f 

Ch'i,  m 
Kuci-clii 歸总， unlucky  tlay,  h2tL 

Kuri-tsang 歸藏， »aine  of 

Yikinf/.  434. 
K'uei-i  hi 會稽， eke""  a"d  cil》' 

in  Chekiang,        255,  ^  3Mi 

K'in 縣， father  <»f  great  1«,  ？ 1L  214, 

3"'  :、2t>.  367,  arjk  MIL  ^ 

K'un-lun 寇礙， "i 讓 tai"  in  Tur- 
kestan, the  gate  of  Heaven,  2M, 
鉱 

Ivun  Mo  g.  king  the  HW" 
K'un-yan-  & 陽， «it>  i" "(""'"、 


uigmzea 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


r.r.i 


Rung 共， king  of  Ch'u  and  his  Hve  Lao  ami  《'li'0ng 勞成， uiouutuins 


sons,  LXlL 


of  tlie  Shantung  coast,  2lil^ 


K  u ii g  di,  prince  of  Ln,  448,  ilil.  ！  Lao  Tse 老子， founder  of  Taoism, 


K  ung  K  ung 井 工 , legendary  being, 

H9,  250.  ^liL 
K  u  n  g  Mi"g  Chia 必明賈 ，跳 

K  ii  u  g  81111  Chih 必 孫支， «>flicer 
of  Ch'in,  22^ 

K  ii  n  g  S  ii  n  C'h'ou  必孫； ^3;，  dis- 
ciple of  JUencivs,  421 . 

Rung  8un  Lung       孫龍， sophist, 

ma.  一 

Kung  Sun  Ni  Tse 必孫 ft 子， 

philosopher,  disciple  of  Confucius, 

384.  3iiIL 
K  ii  n  j»  S  ii  n  Tti  a  n  ^ 孫 段 ， ofticrr 

of  ChMy,  209, 意 
Kung  Slian  Fu  Jao 必 山 弗撥， 

a  noble  of  Lu,  417. 
Kung  Shti  Wc-n  Tse 必叔 文子， 

officer  of  Wu, 直 
Kung  Wang  -th 王, Chou  emperor, 

■21' 丄 

K  ti ng  Yang 必^^ ，  coinmentjitor  of 
the  Cfiim  ch  "t,  274.  458.  4i\h. 

Kung  Yang  Kao 必 羊高二  Kmuj 
Yang, 歉 

Kung  Yeli  ("""g 必治 長, son- 
in-law  of  Confucius,  H97. 

K'ung  An  K i") 孔 安國， grandson 
of  Confucius,  45';. 

K'ung  Chi  a 孔甲， emperor  of  the 
Hsia  dynasty,  355. 

K'ung-t'uDg  空同, mountain  and 
aborigines  in  Kanstt,  221L 

K  u (i  - y  ii 國語, work  of  Tso  C'h'itt 
Ming,  4ti.k 

Lit ng-yeh  艰 邪. south  coast  of 
Shantung,  23L  476,  ailL 


obtained  long  life  through  the  spon- 
taneous iliiid,  9^  Lao  Tse  and  W^n 
Tse  like  Heaven  and  Earth,  100, 
lived  over  2QQ  years,  31H,  liis  theory 
to  prolong  life  by  quietism  and  dis- 
passionateness, 346，  Lao  Tsf  a 
dragon,  WhH. 
Lei  Kung 笛必， Thunderer,  521. 

Li  ^  =  Ta-tai-li, 大 戴鱧， Ritual 

of  the  Senior  Tai、  141. 
Li  son  of  Confucius,  411. 

king  of  (，hou、  527. 

(hike  of  f'hihuf^  2: 化, 

king  of  VK u、  113. 

Li  ^^，  marquis  (,f,  21  L 

Li 犁 = (7m  ytmy 祝融， (iod  of 

Li  mountain,  -see  Li-shan,  233, 

Li  Chi  E^iffi,  wile  of  Duke  W. 、•'•"' 

of  Chin,  21LL 
Li   F  a  ^ ^义， coin|mniou  of  ILm 

Yuan  Ti. 進 
Liki  jjjg 記， Book  of  Rites,  141, 242, 

29；?,  293.  325.  330. 息 148,  450, 

455,  462,  ali  5JJL  oi^  520.  b22u 
Li  lv u a n g 李站, general  of  Han 

Kao  Tsu,  168»  431. 
Li  Ling  ^^Iot,  general  of  Han  Kao 

Tsu,  liia. 

Li-sau  BE  ]^«  poem  of  Ch'ti  Yuan, 
113.  41£L 

Li  Sse  4S 期. prime  minister  of 
Ch'in  Shi/i  Huang  Ti,  11^  170,  torn 
to  pieces  by  carts,  171,  204.  caused 
the  Burning  of  the  Books,  447,  14!) ； 
4f)9.  491. 進 

Li-shan 膨山， mountain,  iiH± 


Luo  5^  =  Ch'in  Chany,   disciple   of  Li-shan  mountain  in  Shm.si. 

Confucius y  10丄  219,  2'Xi. 

Lun  -  Hteg.  』 


5(；2 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Li  Shao   Chiin 半少 |]  .  Taoist 

magician, 
Li  Tui 李兒， tiiL 
Li-yang 歷陽, city  in  Anhui,  1 36,  j 

142.  17»». 誕 
Liang  ：^ 山, mountain  in  Shfnsi, 

傲 

Liang 梁- ― K'ai-f^fig-fu,  c.i[nls\\  of 

ttie  Wei  State,  AliL 
Lia<»  j^，  State,  3 ">.">. 

Liao-tung  in  Manchuria^ 

1 1',7. 

Li  eh  Shan 烈山 - Xung, 

454.  iLtL 
Lien-shan 連 山， name  < >1*  a  Yikhi</, 

454.  ― 
Li  n  II  ii 林胡, barharians,  22iL 

Liii-huai   臨淮, |»lace  in  An/mi, 

I,  in-t'ao 臨》' 兆， city  in  Kama,  107. 
Ling  '疆， king  ("•  <7t'u,  17H. 
Ling  ▲，  duke  of  、VW,  220,  40i 
Ling        /|^T  ronstellation,  520. 
Li  ii  ^|J,  duke,  nncrstor  of  t\w  Chon 

dynasty,  I 
Liu 劉縱， mother  »f  Kao  Tsu,  13^ 

177,  288,  MIL 
Li  ii 留， mar<|uis  of,  ―  Chang  Liang, 

Liu  A  ii  prince  of,  ―  Iluai 

Nan  Tst，  iliL  -AM,  d^L 
Liu  C  hang 劉 長 ， lather  of  Liu  An, 

Liu  Cl.'un  a  'Jaoist,  21111 

Liu  II si. -i  111"  柳 F 惠， famous 
for  his  purity  of  mind,  375, 

Liu  K'lin  native  of  Honan, 

1st  cent.  B.C.,  l^IL 

Liu  Lei  劉累， a  dragon-i-earer, 
under  tlie  finperor  K'ung  Ckw,  H ■'>'). 


Liu  Tse  Cheng 劉子政 -= 丄'" 
Hsiang,  famous  author,  8^  90a  388, 
4,;2, 魏 

Lo 洛, tributary  of  the  Yellow  Iiiver, 
95,  29^  382,  iii 

Lo-kuo 驟阔， Naked  People,  vi- 
sited by  Ffi,  407. 

L o - y a n g 洛陽， city  on  the  Lo  ui 
Honan,  219,  22^  centre  of  China, 
2.')»；  ；  a&L 

Lu         State  in  Shantung,  the  countrv 

of  ('""fuc'ms,  74,  88,  95,  LLL 

187.  188.  193.  227,  237.  217. 

'27,;，  280,  21K»*  'Ml  62^  32^  359j 

細, M\2.  :";7,         Mh.  4iL  44^ 

448,  431.  ■!:,';，  462. 
Lu  Ao  盧^ [，  traveller, 
Lu  ( ' h i a  陸賈. envo)    fn»in  the* 

Han  to  Chao  T'o,  king  o(  Titfh,  84^ 

124.  ：?83.  autlior,  388, 
l,u-chi:i  i' g 應江， circuit  in  Anhai, 

SL  "" 
Lu  (  hi"   II  si  ii 揭邱 雾斤， killed 

two  water-dragons, 
L u-hsie i、  SfX 縣， city,  '.\hh. 

Lii  Pa  ii 得般, famous  tneclianic  of 
Lu, 

Lu-y aag 将陽， c'ly  in  Hnruin,  liiL 

L  u  a  ii 礙 水, rivev,  212- 

L  u  a  ti  H  uu  i  Tse 礙懷 子， oiricer 

of  Chin,  ML 
Luu-h^ng       <{f||<  the  Discjuisitions, 

Wang  t'K wig's  principal  work,  70, 

I.un  -  yii 論語, the  AnaUcts  of  ('on- 

/ucius,  4<>~. 
Lu ng-ch' iian 龍泉， place  in  Chf- 

kiany,  '.1>~7 . 
Lung-  lis i 晚 西, district  in  Kansii. 

\M 

Lung- yuan 龍淵, famous  sword. 


Index  of  Proper  Named. 


LQ 呂 ， father  of  tiie  Empress  Lu  Hot" 

La  ilu  ii 呂 J^,  wife  of  Han  Kao  Tm， 
148,  17H,  -—'16，  248.  290,  305.  437, 
48：；. 

Shang 呂 surname  of  T'ai 
Kung、  ^H. 
LI!  SI" "呂氏 = Lfi  Pit  Wei,  2Iu 

L ii  - s h  i  h  -  c h '  u  n  -  c  h'  i  u    呂 氏 

秋， work  ol'  Lii  Pu  Wei, 息 

M. 

Man  Ch'ien  曼 债， style  of  Tung 

Fang  So,  MSL 
M  a n g  and  T  ung  — ^石 鼻， mountains. 
Hon  Kao  Tsus  hiding  place  in  Ho~ 
nan  and  Kianysu,  1 7^. 
Mars 焚惑 ,,r 火星， l^L  m 

246.  30KUm 
M v  Ti  墨顆， the  philosopher  of 

mutual  love.  4f>1 . 
M  {■  Tse 墨子 = M，  Ti,  74,  83,  85, 
374,  4(>1.  his  mechanical  skill,  49s. 
Mi  hists 墨 家， followers  of  Me  7V, 
136.  162,  inflect  the  burials,  but 
honour  the  ghosts,  4(il. 
M e n c i u s  ^[^*，  spoke  of  Heaven, 
(37.  knew  an  intelligent  man  by  the 
sparkling  of  his  eyes,  73^  83^  no 
controversialist,  85,  on  destiny,  139， 
and  duke  P'ing  of  Lu,  147，  his 
mother  changed  her  domicile,  382. 
on  the  goodness  of  human  nature, 
iiS4,  judged  men  by  the  pupils  of 
their  eyes,  385.  Censures  un  Mencitu, 
Chap.  XXXIV,  on  the  Ch'un  ch'iu, 
4o7,  on  tiie  defeat  of  the  Yin  dyn- 
asty, 48^ 

, uncle  of  Wang  CfCung,  fi4- 

noble  family  in  Lu,  74. 


grund father  of 


Mc^ng  ('hang  ^ n^1,  an  unselfish 

official,  47(>. 
Mt;ng  Ch'ang 孟' 眷， prince  of,  161, 

364,  50K  ' 
M«-ng  I  Tse 孟 穀子， scion  of 

the  Ming  family  in  Lu,  394. 
M e ii g  M i      Shih  ^ 明 jM,  officer 

in  Ch'in, 進 
M  e  n  g  P^n        j^,  famous  for  his 

strength,  199^  380,  43^  484* 
M<、ng  Sun 孟孫 = Meny  L  Tse, 

M  !•  n  g  T'ien  ^^括 , general  "fCh'in, 
builder  of  the  Great  Wall,  LLL  ■ 

•Mt'ng  Wu  Po 孟武 伯， scion  of 
the  M^ng  family  in  Lu,  H, 

.M v n g  Yao   ^j^Jc,   wife  of  King 
Ling  of  Chao,  224^  22iL 

I 句星 = Houk  JStar,  fore- 
boding; an  earth*quake,  1 12,  1 1H. 

Miao   三苗， the   3  Miao  tribes 
civilized  by  Yao  mid  Shun,  379. 

Min  ^^，  disciple  of  Ctmfm-ius  ―  Mm 

Tse  ClCim 閱子 猜， 1 
Ming         descendant  of  llsifh,  o  1 6, 


Ming 明 g|,  star, 進 

Ming  Ti 明帝 = Ihim  Ming  Ti, 
479. 

Mongolia 蒙穀， 進 
Mongols  f^,  hlA. 
Mo"' a  ^  j^，  famous  sword,  504. 
Mou    1^.,   princedom   in  Shantung, 
5Q1L 

Mountain  Book    山經， part  of 

the  Shan-haukiny,  2Mx 
Mu 緩， king  of  Chou,  123,  317,  ML 
Mu         ur  duke  of  Ch'it,,  122, 


Mnu/  T'ien, 


162.  204.  223.  328.  500, 奠 
M  ii 緣， duke  of  Lu, 化 
Mu  duke  of  VMng,  202. 

36» 


564 


Index  of  Proper  Name??. 


M  ii  .  phiin  in  Hf"""t,  where  tlir 
troo])S  of  tlie  Yin  dynasty  were 
defeated, 

M  ii  M  U  & 莫母, "fiiy  wife  of  lluamj 

7v，  m, 

y\  ii  Sh  ii  |J^l  ,j; 乂,  of  Lu.  son  oiChuany 
Bhu%  1ML 

N. 

N  an  ^|^,  last  sovereign  oi  the  Ckou 

dynasty,  318,  50U. 
N  a n  Kung  Ta  Yu 南'^ 大有， 

diviner,  30". 
Nan  Tse  wile  of  Duke  Liny 

of  1VW,  invited  Confucitis^  403. 
N  a  ii  Yung  由， ^^，  disciple  of  rV>« - 

fuciw、  married  to  his  niece,  丁- 
N  i  K'i，au  f^'jl^,  received  the  i>hu- 

king,  2nd  cent.  B.C.,  44H. 
N  i  n  g  Ch'i  ^^戚 , "ttk'ial,  7th  cent. 

B.C., 

N  i  u  Ai  Z| 二^^ ，  duke  ("*//'/，  changed 

into  a  tiger,  193i  ^  322,  a^lL 
Niu  rii'iidi 牛缺， Lii 
N  ii  \V  a 女 她， sister  tif  Fw  Hst\ 息 

O, 

() Lai  .^L  ininisttM'  of  Kht^  C/um, 
482. 、 

P. 

Pa  巴, concubine  of  King  Kung  of 

Ch、、  LliL 
Pa  CWn 霸出， n  giant,  473. 

Pa  -  k  u  ng  -  c  li  it  an  八 公 之 , 
"Memoir  of  the  Kiglit  Coinpanion.s  " 
of  Huai  Nan  Tse, 縦 

Pai-hai  利" 海, Minor  Sea^s,  2hjL 

Pan  Ku 班固， historian, 魁 

Pan  8hu       班担皮 = 尸"" 

father  of  Pan  A'u,  8iL 
I)'ang  Hsien 廳搞， 44'丄 


*a  n  ^^，  j)rinr<is  of  the  fh'fo  ejiorli, 
道 

•ao  iS^.  duke  of  Su"y，  u  1  J. 

'ao  i>sv  j^jj^Jl,  tMii press,  her  super- 
natural liirth,  321.  369. 
'ao   S  li  ii    Ya    |S^J  hosom 

friend  of  Kuan  I: hung 、  176. 
Pei-t'li'iu 貝 丘， [ilace  in  ^hantung% 

',、i  j^jjj ,  aiR'ient  State  in  Anhui^  'M\6. 
oi 》市， prefecture  in  Kiangsu、  ljUJ, 
185,  23<>.  b^L 

Vn^-rlj'rn^ 彭 城， city  in  Kiang- 

507. 

v        Krng  discijile  uf 

Mencius  420,  i2lL 
V  ng  S  h  v  ii  fr  ,  prince  u(  (fh  " 

•jir>- 

V-  ti  ^    Tsu    J^jjH    tlie  Chinese 

MfthusaUh,  Mi^  113. 
Vn4u  Yueli 彭藝 king  of  7,/Vj«vf 

was  pickl<*d,  2】 H. 

i 巧， ritv  in  Shanifwy,  407,  417, 
441), 進 


i  -  l  a  n  g  VJi         fabulous  bird, 

i  Hs i 佛 jj^',  high  o Hirer  in  d"， 
415,  HI. 

i  K  an 比^ f1,  killed  by  the  tyrant 
Chou,  202,  210.  431,  i&h. 
ien  riici o  celebrated  phy- 

sician, 148,  223. 

ien  Ho  -k^P,  of  Ch'u  and  the 
jade  stone,  7^  89^  LLL 
in  分 |5，  city  in  Shms"  1  HO- 

'ing 平， duke  of  Chin,  220,  2^L 

ring 申， duke  of  L",  147,  42± 

ing  Yuan        j^，  prim'e  of,  ,ri'  、  1 . 

'inj;- y  u  ； I  n  ^^j^，  place  in  Shan- 

inn  l  i  ^^*^*，  Ha"  einj>eroi%  4S"i. 


I  e  i  a  d  s 


see  1;，〃/、、、  1 1  T. 


Ki  by  Google 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


r、 (； r) 


I'n  Cli'i  白 /|^，  iuuious  nenenil  of;  Slian  Y  ii           -,  title  of  the  cliirf- 

Ch'i'i,  1 3<>.  liilL  tain  ,»f  tlie  JLHimg-nu.  174. 

>" (  h'in        愈， son  of  the  Duke  Shan^ 商， dynasty,  17,;(5— 1122  h.c, 

of  (  h"u,  liL  519. 

'"-''li'iii 柏寝, Imll      Diik<、  S h a  n g  商 = B/  S/ian</,  name  of 

of  Ck'" 皿  Tse  Ihia, 亂 

柏人' i,,ar('      <h;li、  "7-  Shan-;  Cl.'rn 商 g,  s,,"  uf  KinK 

'•,  Knei 白圭' vich  num.  LLL  r^V/V/  of  Ch'u,  2iiL 

Li  H  si  7l  M         an   °,li,  ial  Shaii^  (  hiin 商 均， son  "、'  Sh"". 

of  Ch'in,  biLL  n_L  MjT,  Oh^ 

Lu 伯樂， fam,"is  lmrse  tia"K'i、  sha n^-Un 上林. imperial  park. 

逢  ana, 

,<>N"i 伯牛， tlisci'i 山、, "•",!/,",".、.  shanfj  Ti 上帝， illL 

his  sickness,  S_L    *        I  ■">  1  ■   1  (;;">，  c. ,         a,      vy  —、•*       -.,       f  ，，， 

if"    m.    Shji  lijuj  1  se        -J— .  mim.、t"r  ot 

"~ ~                                 .            -.  Wang, 


dvnastv. 

%  •  、，-  y /#    -.                     ,  .   t  prince  4»f  S/iana.  • ；"，  ！ 1/1.  4ti:l 

111  7\t*  iaiiKMis  f(»r  Ins  intrt;-  L                      \^  w 

ritv,  TO.  ICK.           t^S.           4^.  ShanS->  anP  I ^羊' '""■"egfjwl 

Y  i  and  SI...          伯^ 叔 *，  hWtl  l,ortendin«  rain' 躯 

•^\4m                                               '  Sliaiin-yti-hsien  上) 眞, city  in 

，" Yi  I'inK  Q 乙丙， oHicer  (if  Cl^kiang,  ILL 

f'h'in,  500.  Sha  o 邵. duke  <>f.  brother  "ID/ 

Y'i 伯有， ininistfr  of  Chnxj,  Wafu/.  31«；.  374, 

2QS,  i>48.  Shao  Cl»r-n«:  Maci  ^  JJ£  J^p.si  liular 

»«►  Yii 伯魚. s"n  "n，o", ，"'"'.、  iiiiL  in  Lu,  '^L 

'(、 Y  f, 伯^，  invito,-  <,f  dntl.es.  S,IJl'^  ^ 少 义' ,c-,M,darv  "'"'卜 


eror,  ">  1 


».i 倏， river  in  Shantung.           JJhs  'Sh''  ('hi  ^1： 稷， SPirits  ol"  ,,,r  I'a,,(l 

Chi.  ii 不 占， an  """•,'，•  "、'（'/,';,  an(1  G,ain' 

n  8  In' n- eh  on 神州. <  liina,  'HilL 

'n-clioii        周. inoimtaiii  in  【1"'  Sin  n  S h f- n s 申/ |»i of  Chin, 

K'vn-lun.  ^  )>h£L  20iL  itL 

"- S  I.     S  h  ii  and  Y  ii  1, ii 神 茶 • 

vhou-fu  "i  S/tansi.  \7\),  dAiL  the  door  gculs,  wliu  friglilen  the 

ghosts  away,  2iiL 

S.  -  Sln'  n  Tso       -jp*,  Taoist  |)liil(isoj)lier, 

Slia-cli'iu  v^j^      .  place  in  Chili.  'I'.Vl.  , 

wl        ,     .m  y u  "    ！       •    、v    ♦  SIm'  m  I"uii«  V>t|0l-  nflicer  n{  Cfi'i. 

Shan-hai-k,n« 山 海輕. "'一  ^  -— ±~ 

-eogrnpl.ical  work,  ^ilL  ^IL  m  S  I, "  t;  -  m  "  |)^  ^  -      v.lla-o,  di^ 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Shili  (  h  i  Tsc 石 子， s..i.  of 
Shih  Tai, 

Sinking 詩輕， l"'k  of  Odes,  12S. 

134,  277,         318,  369,  374,  387. 

409,  44",  4:,1.  400. 视 
S  h  i  h  T '  :i  i       g 台， itol)letnan  of  WW, 

Shili    Tse 世 f    =    Shil.  Shr 

^10, 《 '"nfiician  pliiUistiplier,  <m 
human  nature,  3H4.  :W0. 
Shili  Tse 時子， ollii  er  nfCh'i,  4H). 

Mi  ill  Tse  Y  f. 史 子魚， <>«i«  er  nf 
WW,  tilL 

Siiih  Wei   豕韋， a   "'山 lr  imder 

tl"，  Shang  dynasty,  ^ *>■*). 
•Shili-yi 施离， a  terrace,  2^1L 
Sliou  inniiiitnin  in  Shn'isi,  whose  ！ 

copper  was  exploited  l>y  Huang  Ti, 

丄 

S)mmi-v«t  首^ ^    ii><»i>it;iin  in 

Shensi,  8ti4. 
Shu  4p(         Lady  Sh"  t、f  (',"",  l\K). 
S  h  ii  kingdom  in  Ssrrfittan,  '.VM. 

Sim  Statt-  in  A"f"",  I£L 

Sim  An  J 乂安， :"V>- 
S liu  llsiang  Jj^ 向, officer  in  Chin, 

Sim  II 'i 担虎. Iialf-hn.tlier  iA'  Shu 

Jisiang,  ：?02. 
Shaking  <'auon  of  History, 

IM,  24^  254,  27L  言 
363,  404,  418,  447,  4^  4^  457, 
■i'yH,  4.VJ,  4H1, 柳, 4!";,  ：.04,  51<；, 

SI.m  Liang  Ho   J 汉 梁乾， 仁""'，' 

of  Confucius,  :W 丁. 
Shu  Sun  M"  Tso   jjjC 孫穆 子， 

nohlcmnn  of  Lti,  W7. 
Sim  S'm  T'.ing 叔 孫通. liigl* 

official  of  Han  Kan  T.tu, 
S  liu  Sung  ^J^t  :d 


S|, 


ti  n  ancient  emperor.  »>^,  77. 

1M»  11^  HiL 
304,  :m,  322.  324.  3:,:》.  MO,  .%7, 
37H.  3H."),  3!>3,  404,  409,  420.  4'J4. 
4：>8.  4olL  41iL  47^  481.  51*1,  i^L 


Shun  Y  n  Yiifth 淳于膝 <»«^er 

of  <  h'in,  441L 
S<m        =  A'w  So'/,  Shun  s  lather.  tiL 

S.se  family  name  of  the  Hsin 

dynasty,  MH,.  322. 
Sse 徊， river  in  Sha/ttvtty,  9a»  1H4. 

•21 'J.         235.  305, 蒸 
Sse         (  h  i en 司 馬遷， author 

of  the  S/ii-chi,  UJu  iBL 
S"、  Ma  11  si  a  nf?  .1" 司馬相 如- 

schulnr  and  poet  of  the  Han  pprind, 

1-23. 

.Sse- s hang 徊上, 1 山"' e  in  Sha'i- 

tung,  2iiiL 
Sse  Tai 駟帶， offirer  of  Chrng. 

'20H. 

Su  Cli' in 蘇絮， statesin.in  the 
4 tli  cent.  H.c,  304^ 

Su  Va  A  fA^|g|J^, "could  tell  the  fu- 
ture from  the  currents  of  wind, 

S  ii  W  ii  武， went  as  rnvov  "> 
the  Hsiung-nu^  I^L 

S  ii  Y  ii  ii  n  tfj^^.  ； I  sohlier,  1^  liiiL 

Su  i  ^ ^-,  marquis  of.  in.-ide  artificial 

I  wis,  .'^7S. 
Sni- j/m       破, an  unhicky  day, 

Sun  (，li'ing 孫 philosopher  of 

the  3rd  cent,  b.c, 
Sun  S Ii  ii  Ao  孫乂 ！ 乂 设， """i"er 

of  (Vu,  1«>0. 
S u  n  Y  i        —-,  ancestor  of  Wany 

<，ft'，ing，  ILL 
Su  ii  u 钗南, father  of  Wang  CH nng,  tLL 

Sti  ii  l; - 宋'， State,  the  north-western 
corner  of  Kiangsu  Province,  lilL 

US.  137.  151),  213,  23i), 
■271,  27i\,  2t»5,  21»'».  :m,  365,  AQL 
11",  140,  478,  4WK  il^ 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


T. 

T a -c liu a ii    大傅， ancient  work. 

Ta-liang 大梁 ― K' ni-frng-fu. 

T a  i 戴， brotlit'r  of  Ch't'u  Chumj  '/'."'， 
42S. 

Tai 代， king  of,  tlu-  lak'r  emperor 

Han  WAi  7V,  liiL 
Tai  aboriginal  Stale  nnrtli  of 

SJiansi,  '221^. 
T'ai 邵， rity  in  CiiL 
T'ai-slia  fi 太山， sacrctl  nioimtaiii 

in  Shantuny,  ^  '274^  ^7L 

\Yi4,  aiii, 

T'ai-slia  n 太山， mountain  iti  the 

West,  ±iiL 
T'ai-a        阿. swrnd,  ：>77. 
T'ai  Chia 太甲. Sftuntf  ein|»M-or, 

T'ai-c  h'iu  ^  l),acc  in  〃""fl/'. 
Mil. 

T'ai- lis  i"ian-c  1"1^太左經，"】^- 
physical  work  of  Yang  Hsiutuj,  SS, 
4>>9.  4IL 

T'ai  K  ung  太&.  lx'lpni'it*  «»1 
Wen  Wang,  11^  17^  UlL  UllL  iiilL 
\M\,  i.V.K  AM, 

T'n  i  K  ii  n  g 太 公 ， r:itl"'r  nf  Kno  T-、'". 

T'ai  K  ii      Wauj? 太 必 王 「 
Kumj.  the  minister  of  WAi  Wany, 

T'ai  I'm 太伯， son  (•!*  Tan  F"' 

1'JS.  \M.  im 
T'a  i  Wang  ] ^王， i;nindfatlier  of 

Wen  Wang, 
T'ai- wei 太微. »<'iistellation,  21'  1 . 

T  a  u       ，  persona]  name  of  tl",  Duke 

of  rhau,  20a. 
Tan   -pf,   i>rinrc  of  IV".  81),  Lli 


Tali  ('  liiii  <• 丹教， ;|  1m'.、、 化4. 
Tan  Chu 丹乐， «>f  1  w«.  1 23, 

141.  3>>7,  3X0,  3H,r),  404,  dllL 
Tan  F  u  ^        gnuulfathf  r  <"•、、•>'" 

Wanff,  120,  1M» 
Tan-slnii 丹水， 1 山 "'e  >n 

AM. 

Tan-yaag 丹 陽, rimiit  in  Kimujsti 

nml  Anhui,  8L» 
l";in  T'ai  Tse  Yu 澹 臺 子剩， 

disciple  of  Confucm.s,  311. 
T'ang 唐， Yao's  territory,  173,  388, 

139,  4.*)S. 

T'a  iij?  場. foundei'  of  the  Shmiy 
dynasty,  82,  4^4,  458, 

47S,  ：)!<；.  a±L 

T '  a  ii  g  -  r  h  i 棠溪. place  in  Honan. 

301,  aiL 

T'a  iifr  ( ' ii  ii   说 幾， physid^noinist. 

an. 

T'a"g-k,i 湯谷， Hot  Water  Abyss, 
whence  the  sun  rises,  27 1  secj.,  'llh^ 
T'.-ing  Lin 唐林， memorialist, 

T'a  ni;  Slni  Y  ii  0  J^/ijj-  s..n  '"• 

Wu  Want/,  ^ 
T'a  ng  Yang 唐跌， Wicer  in  '、'〃'.</, 

T'n  o  Clin  1^：^：，  name  jissuiir-<1  l»y 
Fan  Li,  minister  of  Y'ueh,  LLL 

T'ao  T'anu  |^  f^,  iJiniily  seat  ami 
clan  of  the  «mperor  Yao,  'ihh^ 

T'ao- w  ii  f 脅杭 •  l»ist<»rv  of  the  Ch'u 
State,  4iL 

T'«*'ng 膝， duke  of,  'Ml, 

T«-ng  T'unf,' 都通' lavtmrite  of 

tli"  empe""'  J  [an  WAi  Ti,  IMiL 
Ti    稷， northern   barbarians,  211. 
2-21. ') 力; 


I 


i 狄， n, 


nnrtlicrn  tribes,  a  tall  TL 


3<；-2,  4.sii.  iilfi. 
Ti  K'u   帝^，  mythical  emperor. 
LLL  a^L  h±,  ilL  IlUL 


5(»S 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


T  i  a  o    ^j^，    principality   in  Shansi, 

14；).  aim. 

T'ien  Cli ang  田常， a   noble  of 

Ch'i,  441>. 
T'ie"  K  r  i)  pi  |；^,  minister  of  Hon 

Wu  Ti,  ->17. 
T'ien  Ta  n 田跟， onici.il 

息 

T'ii'ij  Wrn 田文， prinr,'  of  Mnuj 

Ch 'ant/  in  Ch'i, 
T'if'n  Ying 田 嬰， father  of  Tint 

I'iiiU  Ho  ii  丁后, "'if<，  «>!'  tliP 
••mperor  Kuny  Wang,  2 1 1>. 

Ting-liii  鼎湖， place  in  Jlonnn, 
322.  232. 

I  i  nj;  IN»     J  f 白， enemy        Wmty  | 

( 'h  'imp's  family,  tLL 
T  infi-  t  'a  o 定 陶 ， place  in  Shantung,  \ 

T  (»- 1  i  State   in  northern 

Corea,  1 7*>. 
T'o-|i'ing 託平, place  in  S/tansi, 

T"ii  <'iiij)resM-dnwau;('f,  wife  nf 

I lan  Wen  Ti,  UIL 
T"'i  K  ii  a  n  t;  K'io 寶 腐圍， In-other 

of  the  rm press-dowager  Tou,  431. 
I  on  Ying 曹嬰， general,  124.  -J  17, 

241,  2ilL 
Tsai  Wo   宰我， disciple  of  Con- 

/ucius,  3'.  Ml. 
Ts"i  Y  ii  (lisriple  of  (',",- 

fucius,   renowned  for  his  gift  of 

speecii, 
Ts'ai  Vji,  Stiitt',  ZL 

Ts'.i  i  M  <• 蔡 墨， liistorioirmplicr  of 

Wpi.  AM. 
IV"  i  S  h  ii  Tn 蔡 扭度， hiutlier 

of  ('hau  Kunt/,  L2IL 
Ts'ai  T-s,*' 蔡澤， """"ter ''"'/''//,， 

147,  native  of  1V«,  .311. 


Tsa  ii  <r  T s ' ;i  n  >^        倉， favourite  «»f 

Duke  Finy  of  Lf*,  14L  1^2. 
Ts'ang  H s i e h 蒼镜, minister  of 

Huanif  TV,  inventor  of  writing,  STj 

'JO,  244,  304,  322, 
T.sa  <»  V  u        父. famous  charioteer, 

138. 

Ts'ao  Ts'an    ^  minister 
Han  Kan  Tsu、  11^ 

Tse  -^,  (amily  name  of  the  Yin 
dynasty,  3 IS.  322. 

Tse  ("h  a  u  -Jp 產 ― Kuny  Sun  Chiao, 
famous  minister  of  CMng,  '20'.).  214. 
ILL  443, 皇 

I  se  ('hang 子張， disciplo  i  A'  Con- 
fucius, 401 . 

Tse  (  ha  o  了" * 招， pniu  e  of  Ch' u, 
170. 

Tse  ( '  li  i  h  ~^*^^，  minister  of  Yen, 

Tse  ('liiii 子^1 f，  prince  rA'Cfi'i,  176. 
l  se  Krh    子 X|'，  father  of  Prj  Yu 

of  (，W"g,  200. 
Tse  Fan  g,'m'ral  ui'Ch'u,  1 59. 

Tst-  Fu  Li  I'o 子服厲 ffl,  at  tUo 
court  of  Duke  Mu  of  //»/,  4th  cent. 
b.c,  U2. 

I'sc  lis i  "^个 "llHcw  <»f  Chrtiff. 
2UH. 

Tse  Hsi  ^ prince  "fOi'",  1 7ti. 

Tse  llsia  夏， disrijile  of  Con- 
/ucius,  Ijiil,  liJH,  lM,  4H1. 

T  s  e  1 1  s  u  -：：  Wu  Tse  Hsii,  sff.  Wu  Yuan. 

T  s r*  K  a  d  -^f'^f'y  pri»<'e  "f(%'«,  1 7i>. 

T  s  t«  K  ;i  o  -jp  JhR  srfi  Kao  7V  Kfto, 
ML 皿  " 

Ts<>  Kiing  ^*  ,  disriple  of  dm- 
fuciwi,  1^  ^  147,  lH^  311,  358, 
ML 碰 400,  409,  410.  41-2.  43  1， 


Tse -k  ling 紫宮， constellalion,  '2U 1  - 
Tse  隋， king  of  Ym.  4-2o. 


3d  by  Google 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


50!) 


Tse  L i n n g    jf^}^,  ^randfatlicr  of 

Pb  Yu  of  ChMg,  •，. 
Tse  Lu  -jp  disciple 

H>5,  182,  37"，  3i*8,  403,  40L 孤 

417.  43K  MIL 
Tse  Ming 子明， his  self-sarrifice, 

Tse  Sse  -jp        ^  K'ung  Tse  t^sr, 

grandson  of  Confucius,  AA^l. 
T s t%  Wei  -j^*        astr< ilo^er  in  Sun(/y 

Tse  Wrii        文， minister  Ch'，f、 
ML  I 

Tst*  Yiug  ^* 嬰， last  rmperor  of] 
tht*  Ch'in  dynasty, 

Tse  Y  ii  -j^-^j^!,  disrij>le  "f(',wj, '/<•/" -、、  I 

Tse  Y u    jj*-^^，  minister  a(  Ch'hi, 

Tse  Y  ii   "}匸 圉， |»rince      f'AV  1 

Tse  Y ii 子 -^^，  minister  《"•（'/'''"  40L* 

Ts'e 賜 = 7V  Kung,  79,  87tL 拠 
AM, 

II 8  i 曾 f?，  lather  of  7V",/ 

Tse,  ；丁- 
T s  v  ii  n    Tse         子， disi'i[>lr 

(hnfuritix,  4 1 3,  417. 

T.srn  jj;  Sh  r  n  ^"^t  -— -二   Tsf'n//  7，.、v  . 

aiiL  乂 

Tso  (Mi'iu  Min- 左 明， ;iiifhor 
of  the  Ht'huat"         ^IlL  45iL  4  "丄 

Tsn-clnian  f 與， conuneiitarv 
to  the  "  Spring  and  Autumn  •' 
("lassie,  27^  27^  374,  387, 

with  Huai  Nan  7V,  H 
Tsou  Vi\  (，  l/i  期$ 伯 奇， author, 

«L 皿 

Tsou  Yang 2nd  cent,  ii.' •， 
ill. 

Tso  ii  Yen  期 ifS,  scliular  of  the 
4tli  cent.  B.C.,  H!^  causing  n  fall 


of  frost,  112.  causing  il"，  "Cold 
Valley "  to  become  warm,  114,  on 
the  Nine  (Wim'nts,  '233;  2H1.  282, 
his  works, 

Tsu  Yi  且 乙， Sfianf/  emperor,  2JJL 
Tsu   Yi    删 伊 ， minister   of  the 

tMnperor  Chou,  1 
T.siin j;-ch'uan 昌赛 川， principality, 

Tsu  nf5  Yi  g 资夷, name,  H .">.">. 
Tu  H,  manjiiis  ot\  appean'd  us  a 

Khost,  20^  21L  24L.  2iliL 
T  ii   11  u  i    j;J-  |gj ,  a  stroii}i;  man  of 

(h  i",  2TL 
V  h  -so  fabulous  inoiuitaiiK 

'l  '，i  An  K  ii  岸 ^ -  minislrr  of 
Chin,  who  destroyed  the  whole 
li<»tise  (»f  (、hao,  1 77. 

Tii an  K ;i  n  M  u  段 木， sclml'"' 
of  "W，  4^  I^IL 

Tu  n  tcri'itory  in  llonatu  nf>0. 

ritn-tuou        牟" city   in  Ihman. 
】1". 

Tu nf?  n  dragon-keeper,  :d 

Tii  ng  A  n  Y u  -J^,  tniiiister 

of  Viscount   Vhien    of  Chao、  122, 

223, 紅 
T  a  n      (，  Ii  i  n  n  ^    j|i  |)J  ,   of  ( 7"''//〃， 

nmnlered  by  liis  wife.  4  1；'. 
Fn      (，h  ung  S  h  n       《巾 ^^"mtlmr. 

7S,  H4j  his  rain  sacrifice.  'AIlL; 

I  nn  i;-ch  ii  n       ^jj，  cinruit  in  nortli- 

ern  Jlonan^  237>  49 丄 
Tunir-fa  n  B f  .^R: ,  a  place, -"； '丄 

Tu  ii  n  Fan  g  So         方 朔， Taoist 

magician, 
Tung  Fu 萧父， :t:>',- 

Tunu-hiii  place  in  Kiamfsu^ 

44S,  4<i4. 


570 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Tnn^-kua  n 關 Ji|《， 1 山 in  S/"'"、V, 

Tuiiti-  k  ii a  n  ^i^^，  place.  LliL 
T，mg-li     洞歷， work    of  <}hou 

Chang  Sheng^  4<i!>. 
Tung  Ming  j|J  fj|j  -  king  nl*  Fu^fii 

in  (hrea^  1丁：>. 
Tung  Wii   Ilsin    凌 無心， ""卜 

fucianist  of  the  Han  time,  H>'3- 

V. 

\"onu.s  白， ecli|>sed  the  IMeiades. 
when  Ching  K'o  stabbed  《'h，in  Shih 
Huang  7Y,  LLL  US, 

W, 

Wa  n  Shih 萬石， mL 

\Va  ii U  lMnan  "f  <)ie  time 

of  Han  Kao  Tsu,  177. 
Wang  壬；^         wile  of  the  rmp- 

eror  Wu  7V,  02* 
Wang  rh'ang  Su  n  ^J-  fi»r- 

tune-teller,  ML 
Wa  n  ^  (、 h  i         7¥i ，  father  <、卩  Wt'n 

Wang,  205,  212. 
Wang   Cl\\f  a  o     壬 priiicr  ("• 

《，hin、  an  immortal, 
W'nng  ('li'ii'ig  3E^],  H"l"s"l 山 （*，，• 

nuthor   of  the   Lun^hrng^   (vl^  his 

ideal,  HO^  in  Chaj).  1  [)assim. 
Wang  I'i;，iig         员 ， lainiMts  rk' 卜 

riciteer,  101^  lii^  :d，  iMi  J-LL 
Wa  ii  u;  M  a  n  ^  ^£ 々~,  usm'pcr. 

181,  21S.  21",  :\0iK  4：)；*, 

473,  IfiiL 
Wang  Shr 王朔， divi 
Wang  Tse  ('h'iao  see  Wang  Ch'ioo. 

ML 

Wan  u  -  wan  if^^',  ； i  kind  of  un- 
lucky day, 

Wa n g  Yaiig  |>^y  .  Ihiunus  t'.';"'l"'r. 
1st  cent.  A.n.,  1 


Wei  St;it(*  in   Hunan ^  85,  i>.*>, 

117.  HH.  122.  137,  154,  1H ，；,  220. 

403. 皿 \\X  40^ 规 
Wei 魏， State  in  S/ionsi,  UK  222. 

30:>,  3M,  :\H2.  >：；■'),  4S-_>.  ：>01. 
Wei        j^jj,  cirruit,  parts  of  Chili 

and  Shansi,  lii,  IlOlL 
Wei  y^,  trihntJH'Y  «if  the  Iluontj-ho, 

""； - 

\\v i  ('li'i 魏齊， pretnier  of  、、W， 
1  !：>. 

Wei  rii'inj;   衛靑， general,  1K9. 
鄭. 

\\v\  K'o   魏颗， ！: eneral  "(Chin, 

211.  2iiL 
Wei  Liao 暴、 supporter  *A' (  h'hi 

Shih  Hung  77，  ； ilL 
Wt'iTse 《鼓 viscount  <ifVVV».  'AH't. 
Wc-i  W  u  Tse 魏武 子， fatlicr  of 

Wei  K'o,  2LL 
Wci-yii 魏愉， Pity  in  S/iansi.  '2：\1. 

ii 女, duke  of  Chin,   153i  Ii>^ 
1S9.  223, 細. 
Wr m   a^,  man i， lis  of  Wn,  Xlia. 

、VV"i  "a/",  duUe  of  Lti.  LL 
Wrn-ch'ang         ^  ,  runstellation, 
21IL 

\\'(-  n  Cli'r  ii  i;  Tiioist  thau- 

maturgist,  3AiL 
Wrii  Chili 文^^ ,  famous  [>liysiriau. 

Wvn  Ti 文^ %         emj)«Tor,  141>. 
17". ：碰 

WT'  ii  Ts  v       ^jp,  T;mist  philosopher, 
UKL 

W'r  ti  Tse       -j^*,  orphan  ofChao.  1 77. 

W，''ii  AVa  n ^        干， founder  of  the 
Chou  dynasty,  HL  121,  121L  130. 
WW,  l.iH,  142,  15S,  188,  2kL 
304.  3 Hi,  ：\22,         424.  439.  454, 
\7i.  4H0,  4H<i.  41)4,  o(U.  il^  5U>, 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


n71 


Wu 武， king  of  C'/i'r/,  LUL 

Wu 武 二  W„  Wo"f/,  129,  185.  [Hfl, 

187,  189.  2QIL 
Wu 武， duke  of  Sung,  29：). 

W  ii         son  of  If. 、'； in  Yttt  "f  (，hi't，  '20t>. 

\V  ii        負， elderly  lady  of  the  time 

•  >f  Han  Kao  Tsu,  177. 
Wu 吳， State  in  Kiany.su,  120,  1^4, 

131.  21S.  ML 
\V  ii  -  ;i  ii  ||,nt',ill's  217, 

•249. 

W  ii  (  hi 無 忌、， prinre  of  IV/v',  4S-J. 

W  ii  ('hiiig        j^g.  officer  r/""'. 
2-2<；. 

\V  ii  ( '  h  ii  ii  K  a «  :l  writer, 

MIL  、 
Wu  Hsii 無恤，  name  of  viscount 

Hsiang  "f  Chao,  226^  229,  ML 
\V  ii  Li 五 禾 |J，  Taoist  inn^ician,  -lUi. 

W  ii  Ling 武靈， king  of  Chan,  22lL 

\Vu-lin«;  place  in  Shn"t'""j, 

4'27. 

W  ii  I'ei  "jj^^jj^,  T.'ioi.st.  friend  oi  ； 

Huai  Nan  Tse,  253,  :Y.)H. 
W ii s ii n        -^，  a  iu>n-( 'hiiu'se  Irihc, 

Wu  Ti         '^*.  JIa/i  ciiipfror,  liZ. 

34*L  370.  iiS.  4：>(；. 

W  ii  Ting  J  ,  Shmuj  einprnn', 

Wu  Tse   Hsii 伍 f 胥 - 、、'" 

Yuan,  2 IS. 
W ii  Wang 武 王, king      the  ( '/ton 

dynasty,  1H0,  \XL  22L  2^  ' 

:R)4.  316,  ^22,  32^ 言 逃 纖 ； 

47h,  4S-J.  1!)4,  W 


W  ii  -  y  i ,  ('liapter  of  the  Sfnikinff  ^ 
佚， aliL 

W  u  Yuan         j  ^  ，  minister  ol'  、W 
"tli  cent,  r.x  .  MO,  202,  210. 復 


Y. 

Ya  Fu 亞义， titlf  of  Fan  7>V«.v， 
I7H. 

Yang  |^r.  mnrijiiis  of,  22^ 
Yang  Ch't  ng  Tsc  Chans  | ^成 
,<iuth(»r  of  the  Yuch-chintf. 

7,;,  KM. 

Ya  ni;-choii  ^^州 ' province,  iiL 
Yan«f  (  hii  the  pliihisopli*  r 

of  egoism,  JilL 
Yang  ('liiing 杉》 終， srlml!"'. 邀 
Yanii-lisin  |^^^，  'n  11' 鎖' i， 

Yang  II si  ii  ^ ^信， pnnce.ss,  ;V>H. 

Va ng-hsin  j:-slm  養^^ 書. Ma- 
crobiotics, work  of  Wang Cfi  'ung,  &L 

Yang  Hsiung 楊雄 二  Ya>i{/  T" 
Yiln,  79, 服 

Yn n*i  II  ii  ^j^j^,  minister  of  the 
(  hi  family  in  Lu,  K1L 熏 

Y;i"n  llm, 驗貨 --- Ymif/  11"，  lii 

Yan  -  Shr  Shih  Wo 羊舌 食我， 
a  native  <>f  Chin,  (jtli  cent,  b.c,  141, 

Ya  nji  Slirni;  ^ij^,  lived  nmlrr 
the  Former  Han  dynasty.  fiZ. 

Ya n  '；  Tse  子 --二  Yew!/  Chu,  Hi 
s."».  ：',：  I. 

Yan^tsc  fjL-  ，'"(？，  1  '^L 

Yaim  Tse  Yini 揚子 窗 = 、'n'"J 
Hsiung,  famous  philosopher,  Tfii  Hlj 
124,  148,  '^h  4，;i>. 

Ya  ii  Y  u  ('  li  i  ^^由 J|^，  """'"is 
archer,  4'.)."),  407. 

Yao  ^fe.  anrient  nnjx*r<»r,  ^ 
12S.  130,  134.  !：»：).  172.  173,  214, 
271,  312,         :U!>.  H24. 

3"7.  372,  :Wr,,  4 'JO,  424,  43", 
4:>S,  451>,  477.  4H1,  :"<;,  a22. 


oogle 


572 


Index  of  Proper  Names. 


Ya  n  and  !S  h  n  n  ^fe  ^Jp,  the  model  Y  i        ,  king  of  Yiieh.  1  .">(>. 

einpeivi-s,  (iM,  7K  74.  both  innctive,  Yi 夷， rnstcrn  barbarians,  1 

！)? s;  182,  371.  :!7'2，  375.  、 

：\7\).  440,  47S.  490,  .1 
Ya  o  J 負， dffili"  iti  I  It  matt,  224.  jlHL 
Yeli 都， city  in  W 

Ych  I\  ii  "nicer  of  Sum/,  '24H. 

ILL 

Yellow  li  i  v  »•  r  jffij.  重 

21)4. 燃 iAL  iii!L 
Yimi  j^.  kin-  of  (li, i.  IUL 


Yi  0|'，  rivpr  in  SAanhtnff.  .*i'jQ. 
Y  i-chang-rhu    易紫 句. work 

of  Yuan  T'ai  Pin,  4<">. 
Yiki'ig  JJj  ^'^»  Canon  of  ( 'hjmue>. 
s7.   .sS.   <)H.    I JS.   IS4.   1ST.  -J.'rJ. 
21; 7，  27').  -28<；.  M.V;,  UK  447. 

I4S.  4 ：)1'.  4.'»4,  A7X  ：)14,  .Vj<>. 


Yi  Ti  f 義^ (,  inveiiU)r  of  wine. 

\  i  \  n  cook  <>f  dnko  I  hum 

V«'ii  inusir-mnstrr  (»!'  Cfum,  2'J  I .       of  Ch'i.  <I9,  7^  7i>,  1  '2h. 

Ye  ii  ^jik.  State  in  C/uK  SiL  JJA  2^  V  '  Vin 伊 JV，  minister  of  T'an.j. 


•J4S.         379.  t-JM,  .192,  itlX 

Yen  (liuiiu 似 」、，乇， "丁- 

Ven  Fa  hi;  ^[ ^方， sclxil.ir.  tti!>. 

Yt*  n  - 1)  ii  «|范|虎， rivrr  in  Conn,  I  丁： i. 

Y,'ii    II  ii  i  |gj  ,   disciplr   of  Con- 

fucius, SU         UA.  3^  ^2, 
402.  477. 

Ye  ii  -1  i  n  ^        |>^,  place  in  Kinmj.^u, 


Y  i  ii  J^，  <ly nasty  -二  Jfsia  dynasty. 
12：?.  J 18.  IV24.  !：>：>.  «；>.  11^ 
ASl,  4S9,  .M«- 

Y  i  ii  ,  |ii'inci|iality  "f  ( 'h'ng  T'amj 
in  lltman.  4.">S. 

Y  i  ii   堇 JJ.  district  in  ( 'hfhiniKf,  '21 

Y  i  n  J^.  duke  of  />/.  'd- 
Yin  Ch'i 尹齊， otlirial.  lii^ 


V<n  L<» 顔路. rather  of  Y»n  〃,〃'，  Yhig  yj..  king       Ch'u.  211LL 

liL. ：化、 " 1'  ,  V  i  it  y  jj^.   innn|iiisat(*   <"'  Fan  .、''〃'. 

V<Mi-t;n>  .  riiv  in  .、:、-"• 力' w,  147. 

I  Y  i  n  i;  tj^.,  yciirrous  ollicial.  4T(>, 

Y，'ii   I  i  -  ―  Sh'，"  、'，"i!f,  i;o(l 

of  the  Ht-.nt!.,  LLL  :t7S,  ：)19. 


iiiS  lamily  ":iim'  of  the  vis- 

rounts  of  Chan.  iiL  2ilL 


Yen-t'ieh-l.ni 德鐵 f 侖. tir.it isr  y  in  i;- c h' ua n  Jjfj  J||.  oirc.tit  in  An- 


on Salt  and  Iron  l>v  Iluan  K'unn. 

mL 

Ye  n  Ts  c  "J**  ^_    }V"  Yi'"/,  the 

Great  Diviner  ofTA'i,  121_,  127,  142. 

Yen  Yuan 顔 J();;|  =  Ym  W",  lUU^ 
1:"，，  Hi.r».  KiS.  :j,;0.  40' 人 111, 

Yen  Yfieh 閣樂， 

assassin  of  //" 

uau  m 

Yi 益， minister  of  YiK  2hsk  27^ 逢 


Y  ini;-Iin  i  j^'^^.  the  "rcat  Ot  eaiu 

Yo  (Mio ml;;  rfsr  - ^-,  disriple 

of  MenduSy  4fcj*j. 
Yu 幽.  einpemr  of  Hie  Ch""  dy»a-sty, 

Y  ii  Yo  ^         disciple  of  Confucius. 
細 •  aiiL 

Y  n  -  li       里 ， place  were  IVrw  Wany 
wits  imprisoned,  14-2. 


Indox  of  Proper  Xamcs. 


573 


Y  h  M  iuo 有苗， aboriginal  tribes, 

179. 批 
Yuan  元 *  duke  nf  Stmy, 

Y  u ;i  ii  jn'inress  of  Lu^  daiit^liter 
of  Han  Kao  Tsu, 

Yuan  r  1/ r n ^  兀 (,^>  lu  化 

Yuan  K u<»  原^ J^，  iniuistcr  of  vis- 
ciMint  Hsiang  of  ( 7tao.  'A'19. 

Y  u  a  ii  -ssi*         想、， work    uf  Tsou 
Pa 《V"  iiiiL 

Yuan  T'ai  Po  ^j^,  a  wi'itt"', 

Y  ua  ii  Ti       W、，  "a"  emperor.  ]_H0. 

ML 

Y  ii  a  n  Wv  n  Shu  author. 
AiiiL 

確 州， .»ne  ,,l'tl"'N  me 
Provinces  of  YiL  coniprisin*;  Shewi 
;uul  A'ffrtvw,  H 了- 

Y ii  禹, anrient  emperor.  IL.  M, 
12：?,  LiiL  Hi  27±  ^TS. 

M2.  31S,  :!:{，>•  33：).  ；?: oli^ 
31)7,  37' 丄 :t7s.  393,  40  L  4',7,  121. 
4:>K  4:)8，  47：>.  47S,  4MK  5(M>,  Mill 
:,19,  ^ 

Y  ii  ^j,  iTioutitain  to  wliirh  Kan  \v;»> 
lianished,  214.  Il^lL 


Y  ii        ，  S/nors  territory  in  Shansi^ 

Y  i!  -  cl/a  ii  1：  faiiKHis  sword, 

>  * . 

Y  fi  Jaii';  aUt-ui|»ted  to  assas- 
sinate the  Viscount  of  dn,  H">s. 

Y  il    Lu  ii      御 龍， dragon-keeper 
under  the  emperor  K'ung  Chia,  ^n-t. 

Y  i\  Lu 俊舉 、" Sh^n  ,、'/'", 息 
Yii  Shili 雨師， Hain  God,  iiL 
Yu  Tse 豫子 -， Yii  •/""•'/,  LLL 
Yii  Tsv  Ta 度子 大， 

179. 

Y  ii e  h  southern,  al)orit;iiies 
in  Kuangtwuj  and  Annam. 】^^  300， 

Yii  eh 勝 State  in  ('/"•—,  120, 
l')0,         241,  21>S.  :no,  aiiL 

Y  u  eh-c  Ii' ;i  ii  ii       常  Yiifh-shamj, 
ML 

、•  iieh-chiii^  ( 'lassie ol  Music, 

work  of  Yang  Cfieny  Tse  <  'hantj,  Jiii^ 
Yi'"'h-liug  j 合， Hocik  III  of  tlie 


Liki,  UL  j^L 


i)('i>i> 


le  in 


Y  u  e  h  -  s a  n  i< 越 ^，  » 
Kuantf-t»ny,  *)0">. 

Y  ii  eh-yo  , ^紐， work  of  W„  ( 
I     Kao,  4(；9. 


574 


Chinese  Works  Quoted. 


CHINESE  WORKS  QUOTED. 


L  My  translation  of  the  Lun-k4ng  is  based  on  the  text  contained  in 
the  110  vols.,  printed  in  Wuchany^  1875.    The  text  agrees 

with  tliat  <»l"  the 漢魏^ ^劳， " is  clearer  tliuu  that  of  the  latter  wm'k 
in  my  possession ,  hut  not  punctuated  as  the  Han  Wei  tsung-shu  is, 

2±  1  quote  the  C'lassirs  fnun  Leaf's  tran.slation.  For  the  Liki  and 
the  Yiking,  of  which  l^gge  does  ncit  give  l!u»  Chinese  text,  1  have  used 
the  jf@  §G 陳氏集 i/ft  •  lii  、  "!•、•'  pt  iiited  in  Nanking.  1893,  and  the 
^  -|^*  -  vols.,  hy   'J^  yt- .  jiriiittid  in  A'tinkiny  in  tlie  same  year. 

丄 The  Dynastic  llistorirs:— the 史 jg,  the  two  '漢 書， the 陪 

QJ,  and  the 葡康書 '"'，'  from  the    二十 四虫， Shanyha; 

edition  1S94. 

丄 For  il"'  IMtilosi»pl.ei-.s:    H， 歹 ij 子， 韓 非子， 淮 南子， 
and  YlJ "子 十一 'Us" 

printed  in  ispovhott  1H04.  has 

been  used.  , 

:、' ■ 子， U"' 山' 海有， a"d  ^ 呂 K 衣秋 ai  e  'l""led  fr"m 
the 子：^ 巧 家 above). 

Besides  1  hnve  made  use  of  the: ― 
"- "^本 御^ 2,  LiO  vols.,  edited  liy  '飽忠 城 in  1812. 


，；- 太 
一" 欽 


t 四庫全 苦 總目， 讓 、'止 s'，  c""t""  reprint  of  1 鼠 
8. 歴 代名賢 列女氏 姓譜. ^  -Is.,  by 萧智漢 ^2. 
iL   ^ 目當 間，： i  vols.,  by 張 ^  、 /同， printed  in  Shanghai  in  1895. 


Errata  and  Addenda. 


575 


ERRATA  AND  ADDENDA. 


Page  64, 
67, 
81, 
81, 
Do, 
II", 
118, 
122, 
122, 
125. 


127, 
137, 
142, 
149, 
158, 
Ki2, 
166, 
174, 
179, 
181, 
18«>, 
190, 
208. 
209, 
211. 
213, 
214, 
21 G, 
226, 


line  o,  for  A"  uei-chi  read  K'uei-chL 

•  3  from  the  end,  for  Wany  Ch  ung  rend  Wang  Ch'ung. 

•  14,  for  K'un  read  h'un. 

•  3   from  the  end,  for  Wan;/  Ch  ung  read  Wang  Ch'ung. 

•  (；   from  the  end,  for  Ch'ung  Tse  read  Chung  Tsc. 
lines  5  and  8,  for  Tun-mao  read  Tun-mou. 

•  13,  lo,  and  IS,  for  Ch^n  read  Ch'en. 
line  8  from  the  end.  for  Chin  rontl  ( 'h'in. 
last  line,  for  C'h'^ny  read  ( 'Mng. 

line  5  from  the  end  ： ― "  Ti  Ya  knew  how  to  give  the  right  llavour 
to  what  he  was  cooking"  should  read ： ― '•  Yi  Ti  and  Yi  Ya  knew 
how  to  give  the  right  llavour  to  what  they  were  cooking."  Ti  Ya 
is  the  peculiar  Cliinese  ahlu  eviation  for  Yi  Ti  and  Yi  Ya.  On  thesy 
two  men  see  the  Indrx. 

line  12,  for  phenomina lists  read  phenomenaUsts. 
，     9,  f(»r  VKiiuj  rrad  Chfiny. 
,     6,  for  Ihia-tai  read  Hsia-t'ai. 
,     2,  for  Tiao  rend  rrian. 

-     6  from  the  end,  for  kindhmrtedn-ss  read  kind-heartedness. 

•  9,  for  Ch  in  read  Ch'in. 

in  Note  1,  for  Ch'ao  read  Chao. 

line  2  from  the  end,  for  Kun  Mo  read  K'un  Mo. 

•  8  from  the  end,  for  Tung  Kuan  read  Tung-kuan. 
»    4,  for  Ho-pin  read  Ho-pei. 

lines  19  and  23,  for  Chin  Fan  read  Chiu  Fan. 
line  4,  for  Chin  Fan  read  Chiu  Fan. 

»    "»   from  the  end  and  lost  line,  for  CK^tig  read  Ching. 

， 26  bis,  Note  1  and  Note  2,  for  Ch'eny  read  Ch/ng. 

- 5,  for  CKdtiy  read  CftAzg. 

, 2,  for  Ku  read  Hua. 

•  17,  for  CKeny  read  ChAuf. 

- lo,  for  Lin  An  read  Liu  An. 

, 1,  for  Ch'ung  Hang  Chao  Tse  read  Chung  Hany  Cluto  Tse. 

•  1，  for  Ch  in  Shih  Huang  Ti  read  Ch'hi  Sfuh  Huang  Ti. 


Digitized  by  Google 


57t> 


Errata  and  Addenda. 


Pnge  232, 
232. 
232, 
23;>, 
*2:!7, 
24：», 
•J94, 
295, 
30(), 
;i2H. 
.t5i», 

i57.">, 
37S, 
38H, 

518. 


.22, 


line  I,  for  S/ta-ch'in  read  Sha-vh'iu. 

, 8,  for  Oi'itt  Shih  Wang  Ti  read  Ch'in  Shih  Huang  77. 
lines  17  nnd  19,  for  Chin  Fan  read  Chiu  Fan. 

•  8,  11.  and  1*2,  for  Ch'^ng  read  Ching. 

line  9  from  the  end,  for  Ch'ung  Tss  read  Chung  Tse. 

•  21,  for  Pei-cKin  read  Pei-ch'w. 

- 4  from  the  end,  for  "  he  ouglit "  rend  "  it  ought." 
lines  h  and  8,  for  Ch'ung        read  Chung  Tse. 
line  9   from  the  end,  for  Ching  Ti  read  Ch'Mg  Ti. 

•  11,  for  Ch  in  read  Ch'in. 

. •  12,  for  Chang-lo  read  CA'ang-lf). 
Note  2,  lor  "  Cf.  XV,  4  "  read  "  Cf.  p.  486  Note 
line  7   from  the  end,  for  Shao-yaruf  read  Shou-yang. 

•  22，  for  Chieh  Kuei  read  f'hieh  and  Chou. 

•  3  from  the  end,  f<»r  Fan-chiian  read  Fan-ch'iian. 

•  7   from  th,'  end,  for  Chuamj  Chiao  read  Chuang  Ch'iao. 

•  15  and  Note  '；，  for  K'un  read  Kun. 

The  wliole  pn^e  from ： 一 "lie  had  four  uncles"  to  " From  the 
Shang  dynasty  downwards  people  sacrificed  to  him"  on  page  .")  1 
is  a  quotution  lVom  tlie  Tso-cfiuany  Ddke  Ch 'ao  29th  year  {Legge's 
tran.sl.  V"I.  II,  p.  7'29).  The  text  of  the  Tso-chuan  confirms  inv 
suggt^tiun  (p.  518  Note  4)  thnt  we  ought  to  read ： ― "  who  could 
inaster  metal,  tcat^r,  and  wood,"  replncing  "fire"  by  *' water/' 
for  the  Classic  speaks  of  metal,  wood,  and  water.  It  describes 
the  Five  Spirits  as  officers  of  the  five  elementary  principles, 
a.vsigniii';  the  element  to  each.    I  have  translated 四 

j 乂       "  ftun'  uncles."    Tjtyges  rendering  "  fotii'  men  "  is  hettrr. 
ii"、、'  mean  a  irtMilleiumi  or  ;i  s»piire  (cf.  Willuint-s'  Dirtiunury). 
line  12,  for  K'un  read  Kun. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTE. 


As  my  readers  will  have  seen  from  the  Preface,  I  originally 
proposed  to  make  a  selection  of  Wang  Ck'ung's  Essays,  and  to  trans- 
late only  44,  i. the  philosophical  ones,  being  in  my  opinion  the  more 
important.  Some  of  the  leading  sinologues  having  pointed  out  to  me 
the  desirability  of  liaving  a  complete  version  of  Watig  Ch'ung  s  work, 
1  now  have  changed  my  mind,  and  am  going  to  translate  the  essays 
left  out  likewise.    Tliey  will,  later  on,  be  published  as  "  Lun-TlSng% 


Digitized  by  Google 


Additional  Note. 


577 


Port  Mhcellaneoits  Essays in  contradistinctiou  to  the  present 
volume,  which  I  now  call  "  Lmi-lUng,  Part  I,  Pliilosoplwal  Essays 
of  Wang  Ch  ting."  The  whole  work  will  also  appear,  later  on.  in 
the  "  MUteilungen  den  Seminars  fiir  OrienUdi^che  Spracheiu  '  probably  in 
5  parts.  The  first  was  already  published  last  year,  under  the  title 
" SelecO-d  Essai/s  of  the  Philosopher  Wang  Cliung."  I  am  very  much 
indebted  to  Geheiuirat  Saciiau,  Director  of  the  Seminar  lur  Orien- 
talische  Spraclieu.  for  kindly  having  undertaken  the  publishing;  of 
this  voluminous  work. 

Berlin,  April  1907. 

A.  FOKKE. 


Lun  -  H^ng. 


.1： 


Digitized  by  Google 


Digitized  by  Google 


igmzea  oy 


Google 


3  2044  009 


33  823 


WIDENER  LIBRARY 

Harvard  College.  Cambridge.  MA  02138;  (617)495-2413 


the  need  for  an  earlier  retui 
notices  does  not  exempt  the  b 

c  r rower  from  overtfue  iirn 

e 

s.) 

m  < 

Thank  you  for  helping  us  to  preserve  our  Co\Uct*°n! 


